Ready to fight Russia to the last Ukrainian
German politics is changing as the EU’s economic powerhouse falters. The Greens, for instance, a party founded on a manifesto of pacifism, are now the most enthusiastic cheerleaders for rearmament.
Stability used to be one of Germany’s greatest virtues. Not any more. A political crisis has triggered an early federal election on 23 February. And Europe’s largest economy has been in recession for two years. German industry has been hit by soaring energy costs following EU sanctions against Russia. Major business groups such as Volkswagen are planning to cut tens of thousands of jobs, business bankruptcies are at their highest level since the 2008 financial crisis, and deindustrialisation looms. Last November, the ruling coalition between the Social Democratic Party (SPD), the Greens (Die Grünen) and the liberal Free Democratic Party (FDP) fell apart over 2025 budget disputes.
Paying for arms deliveries to Ukraine has been a key factor. The huge cost of Germany’s own rearmament was already weighing on government finances. Since 2022, when Chancellor Olaf Scholz pledged a special fund of €100bn (over five years) to strengthen the armed forces, the Greens, SPD and Christian Democratic Union (CDU) have talked of up to another €300bn, separate from the regular budget allocation for defence (Der Spiegel, 16 February 2024). The fact that NATO countries already have ten times Russia’s military budget doesn’t enter into the debate.
All parties except the leftwing Die Linke and Sahra Wagenknecht Alliance (BSW) agree that rearmament on an unprecedented scale is needed, but they differ on how to pay for it. The CDU, far-right Alternative for Germany (AfD) and FDP propose drastic social spending cuts, while the SPD and Greens favour increased borrowing – though they have not ruled out a pro-austerity alliance with the CDU, whose leader Friedrich Merz says Germany should ‘dare to be more capitalist’. Political scientist Christoph Butterwegge fears there will be a ‘frontal assault on the welfare state’ after the election (taz, 30 December 2024).
Germany’s new militarism, unthinkable just a few years ago, has coincided with a radical change in its (...)
Fabian Scheidler
(1) See Christine Chaumeau, ‘Myanmar’s military coup’, Le Monde diplomatique, English edition, March 2021.
(2) ‘Over 5,000 civilians killed since Myanmar military coup’, 17 September 2024, UN news.
(3) ‘New investment law helps Myanmar rebuild its economy and create jobs’, 25 January 2017, World Bank.
(4) Soe Nandar Linn, ‘Myanmar plunges deeper into economic crisis’, 24 January 2023.
(5) ‘Myanmar trade unions and civil society organisations face existential threat following military takeover’, 24 August 2022