Tech billionaire Elon Musk has made a surprise address at an Alternative for Germany (AfD) campaign event, telling supporters of the right-wing party that Germans should not “focus on past guilt.”
The AfD kicked off its election campaign with a rally in the city of Halle on Saturday, where party leader Alice Weidel promised to deliver hardline anti-immigration policies and end Berlin’s military and financial aid to Kiev.
However, before Weidel took the stage, Musk addressed the 4,500-strong crowd by video link, urging them to reject multiculturalism and to “be proud of German culture [and] German values.”
“Children should not be guilty of the sins of their parents, let alone their great grandparents,” he said, in an apparent reference to Germany's Nazi past. “There is too much focus on past guilt, and we need to move beyond that,” he added.
Musk threw his support behind the AfD in December, calling the right-wingers the only party capable of “saving Germany” and praising its anti-immigration stance, while calling Chancellor Olaf Scholz an “incompetent fool.” The SpaceX CEO hosted a livestream with Weidel earlier this month on his X platform, reiterating that “only AfD can save Germany.”
The tech tycoon drew controversy last week, however, when he performed what his critics said was a Nazi salute while addressing supporters of US President Donald Trump in Washington DC. Scholz responded by declaring that freedom of speech in Germany does not extend to “supporting extreme-right positions.”
After Musk’s address, Weidel called on her supporters to “Make Germany Great Again,” a nod to Trump’s “Make America Great Again” campaign slogan.
Germans go to the polls to choose a new government on February 23. The AfD is currently polling at around 20%, ahead of Scholz’s center-left Social Democratic Party (SPD) at 17%, but behind the center-right Christian Democratic Union (CDU) at 30%. If the AfD were to exceed expectations and emerge as the largest party, Weidel is unlikely to become chancellor, as all of Germany’s mainstream parties have ruled out entering a coalition with the AfD.
However, CDU leader Friedrich Merz – who is widely expected to become chancellor – said on Friday that his party would introduce tough anti-immigration laws, even if it has to count on the AfD to pass them. Weidel hailed this announcement as “good news for our country.”
RT News App
© Autonomous Nonprofit Organization “TV-Novosti”, 2005–2025. All rights reserved.
This website uses cookies. Read RT Privacy policy to find out more.