The German government has accused tech billionaire Elon Musk of attempting to influence the country's federal election, scheduled for February 23. According to Christiane Hoffmann, a spokesperson for the German cabinet, Musk is trying to sway public opinion in favor of the right-wing Alternative for Germany (AfD) party.
Musk sparked controversy by posting on X earlier this month that “only the AfD can save Germany.” This was followed by an op-ed in the German newspaper Welt am Sonntag last week, in which he defended the party against accusations of extremism and praised its economic policies.
“Elon Musk is indeed trying to influence the federal election through his statements,” Hoffmann said on Monday. She noted that while freedom of speech includes the right to express any opinion, including what she termed “the greatest nonsense,” it does not absolve individuals from the consequences of their words.
The AfD has been classified as a “suspected” extremist organization by Germany’s domestic intelligence service due to its harsh anti-immigration and anti-establishment stance. The party is currently polling second behind the conservative CDU/CSU bloc, but remains widely shunned by other major parties, which have ruled out forming coalitions with it.
In his op-ed, Musk rebuffed criticism of the AfD, stating, “their portrayal as far-right is clearly false.”
“The traditional parties have failed Germany. Their policies have led to economic stagnation, social unrest, and an erosion of national identity,” Musk wrote. “Despite being labeled far-right, the AfD represents political realism that resonates with many Germans who feel their concerns are being ignored by the establishment.”
Friedrich Merz, the leading candidate of the CDU/CSU alliance and a potential future chancellor, described Musk’s intervention as “intrusive and presumptuous.” He stated that he could not recall a similar instance of interference in the electoral campaign of a friendly country. Lars Klingbeil, co-leader of the Social Democratic Party (SPD), compared Musk to Russian President Vladimir Putin, alleging that both were trying to weaken Germany by supporting the AfD.
A three-way coalition led by Chancellor Olaf Scholz collapsed in early November amid internal disputes over spending priorities. On December 16, the German leader lost a confidence vote in the Bundestag, heralding the end of his tenure at the helm of a minority government. A snap election has been scheduled for February 23.
Founded in 2013, the AfD has become more popular in recent years. According to a survey conducted by the INSA polling institute for Bild last week, AfD co-leader Alice Weidel, 45, is ahead of her rivals in the campaign to become the next chancellor. Weidel is due to be confirmed as the AfD’s nominee at a party conference next month.
RT News App
© Autonomous Nonprofit Organization “TV-Novosti”, 2005–2025. All rights reserved.
This website uses cookies. Read RT Privacy policy to find out more.