Euractiv +
For individuals
Euractiv Pro
For corporations
Looking to access paid articles across multiple policy topics?
Interested in policy insights for EU professional organisations?
A fabricated #MeToo case endangers the Greens’ efforts to detoxify their image on the campaign trail.
Analysis Based on factual reporting, although it Incorporates the expertise of the author/producer and may offer interpretations and conclusions.
Robert Habeck's efforts to detoxify the Greens' image has run into problems. [Kay Nietfeld/picture alliance via Getty Images]
Languages: FrançaisPrint Email Reddit Facebook  LinkedIn WhatsApp Telegram
Print Email Reddit Facebook  LinkedIn WhatsApp Telegram
BERLIN – Not even Robert Habeck can escape the Green Party's ghosts of elections past.
Just as the party's image was beginning to show a glimmer of recovery from three disastrous years in government, the Greens' final-stretch curse caught up with Habeck, the eco-party's charismatic frontman and darling of the country's Bobo elite.
Recent missteps suggest that the party could struggle to rise above the 14% threshold where it has hovered in for months and make it a long shot to join Germany's next coalition.
At the party's convention here, Habeck gladly accepted the opportunity to divert attention from his unforced errors and dwell on centre-right leader Friedrich Merz's headline-grabbing flirtation with the far right, which critics see as the beginning of the end of Germany's cordon sanitaire.
Though Habeck's remarks – including his repeated calls for "confidence" – went down well with the party faithful, it's far from certain the rest of the country, still reeling from the latest murderous attack by a rejected asylum seeker, was paying attention.
Old-fashioned sex scandal
The Greens' latest trouble began with Habeck's surprising proposal a couple of weeks ago to deduct social security contributions from capital gains, a suggestion that was met with widespread derision and ridicule. Exactly why Habeck, Germany's vice chancellor and economy minister, thought it would be a good idea to scare off any German who has savings invested in the markets in the final campaign stretch is anyone's guess.
But that was only the overture. What happened next would be best described as an old-fashioned sex scandal turned smear campaign, one that achieved 'political affair' status in record time.
The man at the centre of the furore, Stefan Gelbhaar, a Green MP from Berlin, faced anonymous allegations of sexual harassment in December that prompted the party to force him off of its list of candidates for the upcoming national election. The party was responding, in part, to media pressure following a report on the allegations on public television.
Then, two weeks ago, the public broadcaster withdrew its story after discovering that one of Gelbhaar's supposed victims didn't exist and appeared to have been fabricated by an official in Green's local chapter in Berlin.
The smoking gun: Habeck's campaign manager, Andreas Audretsch, had taken Gelbhaar’s promising slot on the list, all but ensuring him a coveted MP post after the election.
While there's no evidence that either Habeck or Audretsch had anything to do with the matter, the optics are less than ideal.
A very Green scandal
Unfortunately for Habeck, the Greens' clumsy attempts at damage control have only made matters worse. Annalena Baerbock, Germany’s Green foreign minister, refused to comment on the affair, and then Habeck’s team tried to bar reporters from asking him about it in an interview.
Worst of all for the Greens, the case has damaged the party's credibility on one of its defining causes, as Habeck admitted when he broke his silence.
It comes as an untimely blow to his efforts to detoxify the party's image after its reputation-smashing stint in Olaf Scholz’s ‘traffic-light’ coalition.
Despite his personal popularity – Habeck's approval rating is higher than that of Merz and Olaf Scholz, the incumbent chancellor – his missteps as economy minister renewed the Greens' image of being a party of privileged eco-fanatics seeking to impose their lifestyle on everyone else.
It was mainly his flagship 'heating law' (legislation that would have forced homeowners to replace fossil-fuel heating systems with pricier heat pumps) that rekindled popular fears about Green excess and precipitated the party's decline in the polls.
And yet, amid Habeck's energetic campaign style, those bad memories seemed to have receded in many voters' minds, sparking a recovery in the polls – until he rekindled the doubts.
It's far from the first time the Greens have shot themselves in the foot in the final stages of the campaign. Many in the party still rue the 2013 race, which was sabotaged by a rogue Green proposal to force canteens to introduce a mandatory "veggie day" and ban meat from their menus once a week. In schnitzel-loving Germany, the idea went down like a bowl of cold sauerkraut.
The Greens are a “traumatised party” when it comes to their communication with voters, in part because they had the ‘Veggie Day’ held against them for years, Anton Hofreiter, a leading Green MP, told Euractiv.
There were similar problems in 2021, when Baerbock, intermittently tipped to become Germany’s first Green chancellor, ran a botched campaign as the party's standard bearer. It included a plagiarised book, a pimped CV, and verbal slip-ups, to name but a few missteps.   
Habeck's time to shine
Back then, Habeck reluctantly yielded the top spot to her after they jointly rebranded the Greens as a pragmatic alternative.
This time, it was his turn to make a run for the brass ring.
The Greens hoped that Habeck’s eloquence (and what many consider to be his handsome looks) is an asset that could push them past Scholz’s SPD into third place and even into a coalition government with Merz's Christian Democrats.
For Habeck, the race represents an opportunity to prove himself: Even if the Greens have no chance of winning, if he succeeds in lifting them out of the doldrums, he would remain the party's dominant figure in the coming years.
In a symbolic moment at last year's party conference, Baerbock stood back and applauded as Habeck took to the stage after the Greens confirmed him as their candidate for chancellor.
Any victory or defeat will be Habeck's.
'Human'
His gimmicky campaign, which involved knock-off Taylor Swift wristbands and kitchen-table talks with voters, resonated in many quarters. The party's polling was nearly back at its record 2021 election result, with Habeck intermittently neck-and-neck with Merz as Germans' preferred chancellor.
The one-two punch of the capital-gains proposal (which one newspaper called Habeck’s ‘Veggie Day moment’) and the Gelbhaar affair have put that progress at risk.
If nothing else, Robert Habeck has certainly proven his campaign slogan right. He is only “a human being”.
Languages: FrançaisPrint Email Reddit Facebook  LinkedIn WhatsApp Telegram
Print Email Reddit Facebook  LinkedIn WhatsApp Telegram
Updated: 
 04-02-2025
Slovakia’s Fico tones down defence spending opposition after summit
Would-be German farm minister calls for fairness in trade
Commission shares AI Act prohibition guidelines, but doesn’t define ‘AI’
Von der Leyen and Costa to visit UK on 19 May
European shipowners helped build Russia’s shadow fleet, investigation says
Insect food market is losing its buzz
The tech report that threatens the Parliament’s far-right firewall
Disgraced former Chancellor Schröder is being treated for burnout
Stoltenberg shelves international plans to take on finance minister role
Many EU countries are not yet worried about deadly floods
Slovakia’s Fico tones down defence spending opposition after summit
04/02/2025
3 min. read
Von der Leyen and Costa to visit UK on 19 May
04/02/2025
2 min. read
Disgraced former Chancellor Schröder is being treated for burnout
04/02/2025
2 min. read
Disgraced former Chancellor Schröder is being treated for burnout
04/02/2025
2 min. read
Game of Chequers: Starmer, Scholz and the ‘British paradox’
03/02/2025
5 min. read
Why Friedrich Merz is losing his war on migration
31/01/2025
6 min. read