Credit Cards
Loans
Banking
Mortgages
Insurance
Credit Monitoring
Personal Finance
Small Business
Taxes
Help for Low Credit Scores
Investing
SELECT
All Credit Cards
Find the Credit Card for You
Best Credit Cards
Best Rewards Credit Cards
Best Travel Credit Cards
Best 0% APR Credit Cards
Best Balance Transfer Credit Cards
Best Cash Back Credit Cards
Best Credit Card Welcome Bonuses
Best Credit Cards to Build Credit
SELECT
All Loans
Find the Best Personal Loan for You
Best Personal Loans
Best Debt Consolidation Loans
Best Loans to Refinance Credit Card Debt
Best Loans with Fast Funding
Best Small Personal Loans
Best Large Personal Loans
Best Personal Loans to Apply Online
Best Student Loan Refinance
SELECT
All Banking
Find the Savings Account for You
Best High Yield Savings Accounts
Best Big Bank Savings Accounts
Best Big Bank Checking Accounts
Best No Fee Checking Accounts
No Overdraft Fee Checking Accounts
Best Checking Account Bonuses
Best Money Market Accounts
Best CDs
Best Credit Unions
SELECT
All Mortgages
Best Mortgages
Best Mortgages for Small Down Payment
Best Mortgages for No Down Payment
Best Mortgages with No Origination Fee
Best Mortgages for Average Credit Score
Adjustable Rate Mortgages
Affording a Mortgage
SELECT
All Insurance
Best Life Insurance
Best Homeowners Insurance
Best Renters Insurance
Best Car Insurance
Travel Insurance
SELECT
All Credit Monitoring
Best Credit Monitoring Services
Best Identity Theft Protection
How to Boost Your Credit Score
Credit Repair Services
SELECT
All Personal Finance
Best Budgeting Apps
Best Expense Tracker Apps
Best Money Transfer Apps
Best Resale Apps and Sites
Buy Now Pay Later (BNPL) Apps
Best Debt Relief
SELECT
All Small Business
Best Small Business Savings Accounts
Best Small Business Checking Accounts
Best Credit Cards for Small Business
Best Small Business Loans
Best Tax Software for Small Business
SELECT
All Taxes
Filing For Free
Best Tax Software
Best Tax Software for Small Businesses
Tax Refunds
Tax Brackets
Tax Tips
Tax By State
Tax Payment Plans
SELECT
All Help for Low Credit Scores
Best Credit Cards for Bad Credit
Best Personal Loans for Bad Credit
Best Debt Consolidation Loans for Bad Credit
Personal Loans if You Don't Have Credit
Best Credit Cards for Building Credit
Personal Loans for 580 Credit Score or Lower
Personal Loans for 670 Credit Score or Lower
Best Mortgages for Bad Credit
Best Hardship Loans
How to Boost Your Credit Score
SELECT
All Investing
Best IRA Accounts
Best Roth IRA Accounts
Best Investing Apps
Best Free Stock Trading Platforms
Best Robo-Advisors
Index Funds
Mutual Funds
ETFs
Bonds
Elon Musk used his social network X to promote Germany's far-right Alternative for Germany party, known as AfD, hosting a live discussion Thursday with party leader Alice Weidel, a candidate for chancellor, ahead of a general election on Feb. 23.
"I'm really strongly recommending that people vote for AfD," Musk, who is CEO of Tesla and SpaceX in addition to his role at X, said about a half hour into the conversation. "That's my strong recommendation."
The AfD has been classified as a "suspected extremist organization" by German domestic intelligence services. The party's platform calls for rigid asylum laws, mass deportations, cuts to social and welfare support in Germany, and the reversal of restrictions on combustion engine vehicles.
Thierry Breton, former European Union commissioner for the internal market, said in a Jan. 4 post on X directed at Weidel: "As a European citizen concerned with the proper use of systemic platforms authorized to operate in the EU ... especially to protect our democratic rules against illegal or misbehavior during election times, I believe it's crucial to remind you" that a live discussion on X would give AfD and Weidel "a significant and valuable advantage over your competitors."
While AfD has amassed about 20% of public support, according to reporting from German broadcaster DW, the party is unlikely to form part of a coalition government, as most other parties have vowed not to work with it.
AfD previously protested the build-out of Tesla's electric vehicle factory outside Berlin, in part because the factory would provide jobs to people who were not German citizens.
Musk's earlier endorsements of AfD, including tweets complimenting the party and an editorial in a German newspaper, have enraged European government officials. Musk, the wealthiest person in the world, has also endorsed far-right and anti-establishment candidates and causes in the U.K.
Political leaders including in France, Germany, Norway, Spain and the U.K. denounced his influence, NBC News previously reported, warning that Musk should not involve himself in their countries' elections.
Musk, who was one of President-elect Donald Trump's top backers in November's election, previously promoted Trump in a live-streamed discussion on X. Before that, he hosted a conversation with Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis, who lost to Trump in the Republican primary.
During Thursday's conversation, Weidel asked Musk about what Trump might do to bring Russia's war in Ukraine to a conclusion, as the president-elect has suggested he could quickly do.
"To be clear this is up to President Trump, he is commander and chief, so it's really up to him," Musk said. "I don't want to speak for him but you know I do think that there is a path to a resolution but it does require  strong leadership in the United States to get this done."
Musk also weighed in on what he thought should be done in Gaza, which has been under attack from Israel since Hamas' deadly incursion into Israel on Oct. 7, 2023.
"There's no choice but to eliminate those who wish to eliminate the state of Israel, you know Hamas essentially," Musk said. "Then, the second step is to fix the education so that Palestinians are not trained from when they are children to hate and want the death of Israel."
"Then, the third thing, which is also very important, is to make the Palestinian areas prosperous."
During the wide-ranging discussion, which was riddled with disinformation, Musk asked Weidel to address German voters' concern that her party is far right.
As Frontline previously reported, some AfD leaders followers of the party have sought to downplay or deny the horrors of Nazi Germany. The party still campaigns on anti-immigrant sentiment, and promotes ethno-nationalist views.
In Weidel's response to Musk's question about how the AfD is viewed by others, she characterized Adolf Hitler as a "communist," who was the "opposite" of right wing, libertarian or conservative. Musk agreed.
— CNBC's Sophie Kiderlin contributed to this report.
WATCH: Musk's EU interference is not going to help Trump
Got a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you.
Sign up for free newsletters and get more CNBC delivered to your inbox
Get this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and services.
© 2025 CNBC LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Division of NBCUniversal
Data is a real-time snapshot *Data is delayed at least 15 minutes.
      Global Business and Financial News, Stock Quotes, and Market Data
      and Analysis.
Data also provided by