Advertisement


More Stories














                                    Elon Musk described the Alternative for Germany (AfD) as the 'last spark of hope for this country'.                                                    Alamy Stock Photo





 
Opinion editor of German newspaper resigns after Elon Musk backs far-right AfD in op-ed


‘The Alternative for Germany (AfD) is the last spark of hope for this country,’ Musk wrote in his translated commentary.






                        4.57pm, 29 Dec 2024                    






23.5k












108






























                        Share options
                    







                            Copy link
                        






                            Email
                        






                            Facebook
                        













                            X
                        










ELON MUSK HAS caused uproar after backing Germany’s far-right party in a major newspaper ahead of key parliamentary elections, leading to the resignation of the paper’s opinion editor in protest.
Germany is to vote in an early election on 23 February after Chancellor Olaf Scholz’s three-party governing coalition collapsed last month in a dispute over how to revitalise the country’s stagnant economy.
Musk’s guest opinion piece for Welt am Sonntag – a sister publication of Politico owned by the Axel Springer Group – published in German over the weekend was the second time this month that he has supported the Alternative for Germany, or AfD.
“The Alternative for Germany (AfD) is the last spark of hope for this country,” he wrote in his translated commentary.
My opinion piece in Weld https://t.co/J56Oof6tO4— Elon Musk (@elonmusk) December 28, 2024 
He went on to say that the far-right party “can lead the country into a future where economic prosperity, cultural integrity and technological innovation are not just wishes, but reality”.
The Tesla Motors chief executive also wrote that his investment in Germany gives him the right to comment on the country’s condition.
The AfD is polling strongly, but its candidate for the top job, Alice Weidel, has no realistic chance of becoming chancellor because other parties refuse to work with the far-right party.
Advertisement


Billionaire Musk, an ally of US President-elect Donald Trump, challenged the party’s public image in his opinion piece.
“The portrayal of the AfD as right-wing extremist is clearly false, considering that Alice Weidel, the party’s leader, has a same-sex partner from Sri Lanka! Does that sound like Hitler to you? Please!”
Musk’s commentary has led to a debate in German media over the boundaries of free speech, with the paper’s own opinion editor announcing her resignation, pointedly on Musk’s social media platform, X.
Eva Marie Kogel wrote: “I always enjoyed leading the opinion section of WELT and WAMS. Today an article by Elon Musk appeared in Welt am Sonntag. I handed in my resignation yesterday after it went to print.”
Ich habe immer gerne das Meinungsressort von WELT und WAMS geleitet. Heute ist in der Welt am Sonntag ein Text von Elon Musk erschienen. Ich habe gestern nach Andruck meine Kündigung eingereicht. https://t.co/Ss1FNGiwAL— Eva Marie Kogel (@emkogel) December 28, 2024 
A critical article by the future editor-in-chief of the Welt group, Jan Philipp Burgard, accompanied Musk’s opinion piece.
“Musk’s diagnosis is correct, but his therapeutic approach, that only the AfD can save Germany, is fatally wrong,” he wrote.
Responding to a request for comment from the German Press Agency, dpa, the current editor-in-chief of the Welt group, Ulf Poschardt, and Burgard – who is due to take over on 1 January  – said in a joint statement that the discussion over Musk’s piece was “very insightful. Democracy and journalism thrive on freedom of expression.”
“This will continue to determine the compass of the ‘world’ in the future. We will develop ‘Die Welt’ even more decisively as a forum for such debates,” they wrote to dpa.











Author

Press Association















                View 108 comments
            

Send Tip or Correction





Embed this post
To embed this post, copy the code below on your site

600px wide
<iframe width="600" height="460" frameborder="0" style="border:0px;" src="https://www.thejournal.ie/https://www.thejournal.ie/elon-musk-afd-welt-opinion-piece-germany-6582607-Dec2024/?embedpost=6582607&width=600&height=460" ></iframe>


400px wide
<iframe width="600" height="460" frameborder="0" style="border:0px;" src="https://www.thejournal.ie/https://www.thejournal.ie/elon-musk-afd-welt-opinion-piece-germany-6582607-Dec2024/?embedpost=6582607&width=400&height=460" ></iframe>


300px wide
<iframe width="600" height="460" frameborder="0" style="border:0px;" src="https://www.thejournal.ie/https://www.thejournal.ie/elon-musk-afd-welt-opinion-piece-germany-6582607-Dec2024/?embedpost=6582607&width=300&height=460" ></iframe>








            Email “Opinion editor of German newspaper resigns after Elon Musk backs far-right AfD in op-ed”.
        



Your Email





Recipient's Email






Submit








Feedback on “Opinion editor of German newspaper resigns after Elon Musk backs far-right AfD in op-ed”.


Your Feedback




Your Email (optional)



Submit









Report a Comment


Please select the reason for reporting this comment.


                        Please select your reason for reporting...
                    

                        It contains offensive language, is hateful or incites violence
                    

                        It contains a libellous/defamatory statement
                    

                        Some other reason...
                    




Please give full details of the problem with the comment...




Submit









Close










                    108                    Comments
                



                This is YOUR comments community. Stay civil, stay constructive, stay on topic.
                Please familiarise yourself with our comments policy
                here
                before taking part.
            

Leave a Comment












Submit a report

                    Please help us understand how this comment violates our community guidelines.
















Defamation
Damaging the good reputation of someone, slander, or libel.










Racism or Hate speech
An attack on an individual or group based on religion, race, gender, or beliefs.










Trolling or Off-topic
An attempt to derail the discussion.










Inappropriate language
Profanity, obscenity, vulgarity, or slurs.










Spam
Advertising, phishing, scamming, bots, or repetitive posts.










Other







Please provide additional information



Thank you for the feedback

                            Your feedback has been sent to our team for review.
                        





                            Cancel
                        

                            Next
                        

                            Submit
                        

                            Done
                        






Leave a commentcancel
















Log out





Newly created accounts can only comment using The Journal app.
    This is to add an extra layer of security to account creation.
    Download and sign into the app to continue.














 









Access to the comments facility has been disabled for this user
View our policy




⚠️ Duplicate comment




Sign in

                            Post Comment
                        
















Sign in to have your say
Or create a free account to join the discussion







afd
Alice Weidel
Alternative for Germany
Elon musk
Germany
welt
Welt am Sonntag
x




















News in 60 seconds












Potomac River Trump says 'no survivors' from Washington plane crash as 28 bodies recovered



                                            Updated
                                        4 hrs ago                






77.8k





164















dáil chaos on the cards No agreement on Lowry speaking rights row with meeting scheduled for morning



                                            Updated
                                        16 mins ago                






6.1k















evening fix Here's What Happened Today: Thursday



                                        20 mins ago                






27















Central Applications Office CAO extends application deadline for those impacted by Storm Éowyn



                                        35 mins ago                






311





0















no change there so NUI graduates re-elect Michael McDowell, Rónán Mullen and Alice Mary Higgins to Seanad



                                            Updated
                                        1 hr ago                






14.5k





45















Storm Éowyn Around 89,000 still without power as Naughton concedes many impacted are at 'boiling point'



                                            Updated
                                        1 hr ago                






4.5k





29















RIP Singer and actress Marianne Faithfull dies aged 78



                                        1 hr ago                






5.9k

















Potomac River Trump says 'no survivors' from Washington plane crash as 28 bodies recovered



                                            Updated
                                        4 hrs ago                






77.8k





164















The Morning Lead 'Inherently unjust': Why a man with no prior convictions was jailed for six years this week





Muiris O'Cearbhaill





                                        21 hrs ago                






46.2k















Courts Family of Limerick student Joe Drennan 'disgusted' by concurrent jail sentence for his hit-and-run killer



                                        4 hrs ago                






27.2k















Galway Schools and industrial units evacuated due to major fire at business park in Claregalway



                                            Updated
                                        2 hrs ago                






24.3k