Skip to comments.
Posted on 01/25/2025 4:43:53 PM PST by dynachrome
Elon Musk made a surprise appearance during Germany's AfD (Alternative fuer Deutschland) election campaign event in Halle in eastern Germany on Saturday, speaking publicly in support of the far right party for the second time in as many weeks. Addressing a hall of 4,500 people alongside party leader Alice Weidel, Musk spoke live via video link about preserving German culture and protecting the German people. "It's good to be proud of German culture, German values, and not to lose that in some sort of multiculturalism that dilutes everything," Musk said. Last week, the U.S. billionaire caused uproar after he made a gesture that drew online comparisons to a Nazi salute during U.S. President Donald Trump's inauguration festivities. On Saturday, he said "children should not be guilty of the sins of their parents, let alone their great grandparents," apparently referring to Germany's Nazi past. "There is too much focus on past guilt, and we need to move beyond that," he said. Musk, who spoke of suppression of speech under Germany's government, has previously attacked German Chancellor Olaf Scholz on X.
(Excerpt) Read more at reuters.com ...
Far right! I thought the new term was ‘Extreme Right’.
What the heck is this “far right” tag the press keeps pushing on the AfD?
Exactly what in their platform and stated policies justifies using this label?
“preserving German culture and protecting the German people”
that’s far right?
oh, please.
you’re embarrasing yourself Emma-Victoria.
In Europe “far right” means anyone who believes in borders,nationality and culture.
How does it work there for left-right on philosophy in Germany?
70% taxes & 80% control of the other 30% by government = Far Left?
60% taxes & 70% control of the other 40% by government = Center Left?
50% taxes & 60% control of the other 50% by government = Center Right?
40% taxes & 50% control of the other 60% by government = Far Right?
Whenever I hear anyone using the Left-Right words (with adverbs like extreme, far, etc) I’m curious to know what they mean about Control/Power. If they aren’t clear then their adjectives/adverbs are meaningless noise.
“Borders, language, culture”
Dr. Michael Savage
A hall? Like a beer hall? Maybe one that could be the site of a putsch? Leftist wordplay is evil and tiresome.
Leftist wordplay is evil and tiresome.
Hurrah, Musk! I don’t want to see Europe lost to the idiotic multiculturalism, mass third world immigration, far-left politics with which some of these countries are in danger of going down the drain.
The far left media never gives up.
Hopefully the far left media will go broke.
Don’t shrink from the term “far right”.
Anyone who supports their own nation, as all good people should, is far right by definition. Everyone on this website is far right.
Be proud of it. Own it.
Here’s their platform
They are Euroskeptic, anti-mass-immigration, and in favor of reduced government.
I didn’t see anything there that the average FReeper would be bothered by.
https://www.afd.de/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/2017-04-12_afd-grundsatzprogramm-englisch_web.pdf
Everything that opposes the status quo is "far right".Reform in UK, AfD in Germany, National Rally is the largest bloc in the French Parliament but failed to form a majority so Macron and his allies were able to shut them out.And yes, Trump and the MAGA movement is "far right".
Reform in UK, AfD in Germany, National Rally is the largest bloc in the French Parliament but failed to form a majority so Macron and his allies were able to shut them out.And yes, Trump and the MAGA movement is "far right".
And yes, Trump and the MAGA movement is "far right".
This is what Nancy Pelosi calls a wrap smear.
F’n Reuters
Thus speakers Nancy: “ We call it the wrap-up smear. You smear somebody with falsehoods and all the rest and then you merchandise it. And then you write it and if they see it’s reported in the press that this, this, this and this.”
“far right” just means they’re not nihilists.
Navigation: use the links below to view more comments.
first 1-20, 21-25 next last


Disclaimer:
    Opinions posted on Free Republic are those of the individual
    posters and do not necessarily represent the opinion of Free Republic or its
    management. All materials posted herein are protected by copyright law and the
    exemption for fair use of copyrighted works.





Free Republic
Browse
  · Search



News/Activism
Topics
  · Post Article





FreeRepublic, LLC, PO BOX 9771, FRESNO, CA 93794


FreeRepublic.com is powered by software copyright 2000-2008 John Robinson
Disclaimer:
    Opinions posted on Free Republic are those of the individual
    posters and do not necessarily represent the opinion of Free Republic or its
    management. All materials posted herein are protected by copyright law and the
    exemption for fair use of copyrighted works.