Search the news, stories & people
Personalise the news and
stay in the know
Emergency
Backstory
Newsletters
中文新闻
BERITA BAHASA INDONESIA
TOK PISIN
Topic:World Politics
Billionaire Elon Musk speaks to an election campaign event of the AfD. (Reuters: Karina Hessland)
US tech billionaire Elon Musk has again endorsed the far-right Alternative fuer Deutschland (AfD) party in Germany ahead of elections.
Meanwhile, thousands of protesters turned out against the AfD turned across Germany.
Germany will go to the polls on February 23.
Tens of thousands of Germans have rallied against the far-right ahead of next month's legislative elections, as US tech billionaire Elon Musk again endorsed the far-right Alternative fuer Deutschland (AfD) party.
Mr Musk, speaking by video link on Saturday, told thousands of AfD supporters gathered in the eastern city of Halle that their party was "the best hope for the future of Germany".
"It's good to be proud of German culture, German values, and not to lose that in some sort of multiculturalism that dilutes everything," Mr Musk said.
AfD supporters at the rally shouted their approval as party co-leader Alice Weidel looked on smiling.
Far-right party Alternative for Germany is running second in national polls. Here's how it got there.
Meanwhile, protesters against the AfD turned out in cities across Germany.
The largest gatherings took place in Berlin and Cologne, with police revising their turnout figures upwards to 35,000 and 40,000 respectively.
Organisers in Berlin claimed that 100,000 people attended the protests in the capital.
The protesters there used their mobile phones to form "a sea of light for democracy" in front of the Brandenburg Gate, brandishing letters forming the words "Hope and Resistance".
Organisers claimed 100,000 people attended protests against the far-right party.  (Reuters: Liesa Johannssen)
AfD is polling at about 20 per cent ahead of Germany's February 23 elections — a record for a party that has already shattered a decades-old taboo in post-war Germany against supporting the far right.
The mainstream conservative CDU/CSU alliance leads on about 30 per cent, with CDU leader Friedrich Merz the favourite to become chancellor after the elections.
Mr Musk, who has integrated himself into Trump's administration, told the AfD rally: "I think this election coming up in Germany is incredibly important."
"I think it could decide the entire fate of Europe, maybe the fate of the world."
Activists take part in a demonstration against AfD at the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin. (Reuters: Liesa Johannssen)
Mr Musk has rattled European politicians in recent weeks with comments on his social platform X supporting AfD and far-right politicians in other countries, including Britain.
He also drew attention this week for making a public gesture some observers interpreted as a straight-armed Nazi salute, a claim he himself dismissed as a smear.
Like Mr Trump, the AfD opposes immigration, denies climate change, rails against gender politics and has declared war on a political establishment and mainstream media it claims limit free speech.
The anti-AfD rallies took place in some 60 towns following calls from a variety of organisations, attracting more people than the police had initially expected.
There is debate about what gesture the tech billionaire meant to make at the Capital arena on Monday. Here's what people are saying.
The CDU's Mr Merz also came in for criticism.
Many protesters fear he is tempted to break his party's policy of refusing to enter into coalition talks with the AfD.
There was also a protest in the southern city of Aschaffenbourg, where a deadly knife attack this week by an Afghan migrant further inflamed the debate over immigration.
Several thousand also turned out in the eastern city of Halle, where the AfD rally was addressed by Mr Musk, leading to a few incidents.
Halle police said they had opened criminal investigations for offences including assault, insults and disrupting traffic.
Ms Weidel told her rally that migrants in Germany had to be sent home.
AFP/Reuters
Topic:Air and Space Accidents and Incidents
LIVE
Topic:Disasters, Accidents and Emergency Incidents
Topic:Child Abuse
Topic:Crime
Topic:Air and Space Accidents and Incidents
Topic:Street Art
Topic:Crime
Community and Society
Germany
Government and Politics
United States
World Politics
Topic:Air and Space Accidents and Incidents
Topic:Air and Space Accidents and Incidents
Topic:Disasters, Accidents and Emergency Incidents
Topic:Child Abuse
Topic:Crime
Analysis by Michelle Grattan
Topic:Art
Topic:Elections
Topic:Australian Federal Elections
We acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we live, learn, and work.
This service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP), APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright and cannot be reproduced.
AEST = Australian Eastern Standard Time which is 10 hours ahead of GMT (Greenwich Mean Time)