German Chancellor Olaf Scholz has welcomed the idea of a meeting between Russian President Vladimir Putin and US President-elect Donald Trump, saying it could potentially help resolve the Ukraine conflict.
Scholz made the remarks on Saturday while speaking to state broadcaster ARD. A Trump-Putin meeting could potentially help kickstart “possible negotiations” on the Ukraine conflict and ultimately “stop the killing.”
“In this respect, it is not bad news if the American president[-elect] and the Russian president want to meet,” Scholz stated.
Trump previously stated that a meeting with Putin is being set up, signaling it would likely take place after he officially takes office on January 20. Moscow has confirmed that both Putin and Trump have expressed their readiness to communicate, with Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov stating, however, that there are still no specifics on when and where the meeting would be held.
“President Putin has repeatedly stated his openness to contacts with international leaders, including the US president and, in particular, Donald Trump,” Peskov said earlier this week.
“No conditions are required for this. What is required is a mutual desire and political will to conduct a dialogue to resolve existing problems through dialogue,” he added.
During his election campaign, Trump repeatedly pledged to bring the conflict between Russia and Ukraine to an end within 24 hours, yet provided no specifics on how he plans to do so. Earlier this week, the president-elect admitted that he would need up to six months after assuming office to help secure an agreement between Moscow and Kiev.
Over the past few weeks, Scholz has been rumored to be seeking a meeting with the Russian president; however, Moscow has said there are no plans so far. Earlier this month, the German chancellor also refuted the rumors.
The chancellor lashed out at German MP Roderich Kiesewetter for spreading rumors about the supposed trip to Moscow to meet with Putin, calling them “baseless” and “deeply inappropriate.” German government spokesperson Steffen Hebestreit called the claims “entirely fabricated,” “defamatory,” and “malicious,” adding that the trip “would make no sense at all.”
RT News App
© Autonomous Nonprofit Organization “TV-Novosti”, 2005–2025. All rights reserved.
This website uses cookies. Read RT Privacy policy to find out more.