German Chancellor Olaf Scholz pushed back against accusations that he is casting Ukraine aside in an attempt to drum up support for his trailing Social Democrats ahead of a snap election next month.
Author of the article:
You can save this article by registering for free here. Or sign-in if you have an account.
(Bloomberg) — German Chancellor Olaf Scholz pushed back against accusations that he is casting Ukraine aside in an attempt to drum up support for his trailing Social Democrats ahead of a snap election next month.
Speaking to reporters in Berlin, Scholz said he was ready to send an additional €3 billion ($3.09 billion) to Ukraine so long as the funds were generated through net new borrowing and not budget cuts.
“This is the path that practically every other country around us has taken,” Scholz said at a news conference following talks with Swedish Prime Minister Ulf Kristersson.
Subscribe now to read the latest news in your city and across Canada.
Subscribe now to read the latest news in your city and across Canada.
Create an account or sign in to continue with your reading experience.
Create an account or sign in to continue with your reading experience.
“It is a German peculiarity that some people think that we have to finance this by cutting pensions, by cutting transfers to local authorities, by investing less in roads and railways, by providing less support for the economy,” he said, referring to aid to Ukraine.
“The either-or approach is wrong. And that’s the main reason why I decided last November to end the government,” Scholz said, adding that voters will now have to decide how to finance further support for Ukraine.
Criticism of Scholz’s approach has not only come from the conservative opposition.
Foreign Minister Annalena Baerbock from the Greens, one of the parties in the governing coalition, indirectly reproached Scholz for not providing Ukraine with €3 billion in additional support before the Feb. 23 election. That measure was proposed both by her ministry and by Defense Minister Boris Pistorius, a senior member of Scholz’s party.
“Germany as a whole isn’t currently seen as a driving force for peace policy in Europe, and honestly, that pains me,” Baerbock told Politico.
Without naming Scholz personally, she added: “Even now, during the election campaign, some prioritize a national perspective — or how to quickly gain a few votes in the parliamentary election — rather than taking real responsibility for securing Europe’s peace and freedom.”
“For me, responsible politics means not zigzagging and then perhaps changing position during election campaigns,” Baerbock said.
The chancellor has previously insisted that additional military and economic aid to Ukraine must be financed through new borrowing and not via cuts in social spending or in investment in the green energy transition.
Scholz’s government earmarked €4 billion for Ukraine in its 2025 budget, and noted that additional funds are available in the form of profits from frozen Russian assets.
Moreover, not all of Germany’s support is accounted for in its annual budget. Germany also provides indirect funding via the European Union, as it shoulders the largest share of the bloc’s budget, which includes aid to Ukraine.
Scholz also expressed confidence that US President-elect Donald Trump would not abruptly end American support for Ukraine, referencing recent phone calls with Trump as well as conversations between aides.
Postmedia is committed to maintaining a lively but civil forum for discussion. Please keep comments relevant and respectful. Comments may take up to an hour to appear on the site. You will receive an email if there is a reply to your comment, an update to a thread you follow or if a user you follow comments. Visit our Community Guidelines for more information.
365 Bloor Street East, Toronto, Ontario, M4W 3L4
© 2025 Financial Post, a division of Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved. Unauthorized distribution, transmission or republication strictly prohibited.
This website uses cookies to personalize your content (including ads), and allows us to analyze our traffic. Read more about cookies here. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
You can manage saved articles in your account.
and save up to 100 articles!
You can manage your saved articles in your account and clicking the X located at the bottom right of the article.