Euractiv +
For individuals
Euractiv Pro
For corporations
Looking to access paid articles across multiple policy topics?
Interested in policy insights for EU professional organisations?
Even as the party holds strong in the polls, it remains riven by internal divisions.
This article is exceptionally available for free! Want access to more exclusive content like this? Discover all the benefits of Euractiv +.
News Based on facts, either observed and verified directly by the reporter, or reported and verified from knowledgeable sources.
AfD currently polls second with 21%, only behind the right-wing Christian Democrats (CDU/EPP). [Photo by Sean Gallup/Getty Images]
Languages: FrançaisPrint Email Reddit Facebook  LinkedIn WhatsApp Telegram UpdatesThis article has been updated.
Print Email Reddit Facebook  LinkedIn WhatsApp Telegram
Alice Weidel’s election as the far-right Alternative for Germany's (AfD) candidate for chancellor this weekend was hardly a surprise. But it did end up exposing the tensions in a party split between its leadership and base.
The AfD met in Riesa, a small city in the eastern state of Saxony, for its pre-election party conference. With the collapse of the ruling coalition of Social Democrats (SPD), Greens, and Liberals (FDP) in November, Germany is holding a snap election on 23 February.
Weidel has her sights firmly set on the chancellor post, but is a longshot to say the least. While the AfD is polling second with 21%, about 10 points behind the center-right Christian Democrats (CDU), it has no potential partners because all of the other parties have ruled out a coalition with it.
The convention in Riesa was delayed for two hours due to protests by activists outside of the conference centre.
The vote on Weidel was quick and carefully choreographed to ensure unanimity. Anyone opposing her would have had to stand up in front of the whole convention and declare themselves. No one did and she received a unanimous endorsement.
In her acceptance speech, Weidel declared war on what she called “windmills of shame," a reference to the thousands of wind turbines that dot Germany's rural landscape to generate electricity.
After the election, the party leadership rushed to join their candidate for a photo on the stage before disappearing almost as quickly.
Weidel skipped most the convention debate concerning the party programme. But it was there that the cracks in the party's united front were most apparent.
Hardliners opposed any changes to the party's opposition to abortion, for example, which the AfD's less radical wing fears will turn off mainstream voters. The same was true of the party's position on climate change (it favours abandoning international climate agreements) to military service (it wants a return of conscription).
For all of its success at the ballot box in recent years, the party has been riven by internal divisions and infighting.
The most heated moment came during the debate over whether to reform the party’s youth wing, Junge Alternative (JA), which had previously been declared “right-wing extremist” by German authorities.
Though the reform passed, it did so only narrowly, with 71% of delegates voting in favour, just above the 66% majority needed.
At the end of the conference, Weidel declared, "We stand united" – perhaps more to convince herself than anyone else in the room.
[Edited by Martina Monti/Matthew Karnitschnig]
Updated: 
 13-01-2025
Slovakia’s Fico tones down defence spending opposition after summit
Would-be German farm minister calls for fairness in trade
Commission shares AI Act prohibition guidelines, but doesn’t define ‘AI’
Von der Leyen and Costa to visit UK on 19 May
European shipowners helped build Russia’s shadow fleet, investigation says
Insect food market is losing its buzz
The tech report that threatens the Parliament’s far-right firewall
Disgraced former Chancellor Schröder is being treated for burnout
Stoltenberg shelves international plans to take on finance minister role
Many EU countries are not yet worried about deadly floods
Slovakia’s Fico tones down defence spending opposition after summit
04/02/2025
3 min. read
Von der Leyen and Costa to visit UK on 19 May
04/02/2025
2 min. read
Disgraced former Chancellor Schröder is being treated for burnout
04/02/2025
2 min. read
Starmer details expectations in EU-UK defence deal
03/02/2025
2 min. read
EU to fund research in mass production of kamikaze drones
30/01/2025
3 min. read
Mutual defence applies in space, says Kallas
30/01/2025
2 min. read