January 9, 2025 at 5:46 pm EST By Taegan Goddard Leave a Comment
“Elon Musk urged Germans to vote for the far-right Alternative for Germany (AfD) in an upcoming election in a conversation with its leader on his social media platform X that highlighted the U.S. billionaire’s growing ambition to sway European politics,” USA Today reports.
Bloomberg: “The discussion, which ranged from Hitler and Stalin to aliens and a human settlement on Mars, lasted for just over an hour. Musk has more than 211 million followers on X and 105,000 people were listening in before the event kicked off.”
Filed Under: Foreign Elections
You're reading the free version of Political Wire
Upgrade to a paid membership to unlock full access. The process is quick and easy. You can even use Apple Pay.
Upgrade Now
Charlie Sykes and I analyzed the tumultuous first 11 days of President Trump’s second term. Here’s a video if you missed it: Join now to continue reading. Members get exclusive…
“When White House press secretary Karoline Leavitt’s failed congressional campaign amended its filings last week — revealing that she appears to have received hundreds of thousands of dollars in excessive…
“Robert F. Kennedy Jr.’s bid to lead the Department of Health and Human Services could come down to one senator,” Politico reports. “That senator, Bill Cassidy (R-LA), said he was…
White House envoy Steve Witkoff told Axios in an interview at the end of his trip to the Middle East that rebuilding Gaza could take between 10 and 15 years.Save…
“Mike Rogers, the Republican nominee last year for a U.S. Senate seat in Michigan who was backed by President Donald Trump, said Thursday that he is ‘strongly considering’ running again…
“A senator at Kash Patel’s confirmation hearing to be FBI director pressed him to articulate a simple truth: Joe Biden won the 2020 election,” the New York Times reports. “Under…
“A series of internal FBI emails released on Thursday showed that agents and officials followed standard procedure nearly three years ago when they opened the historic criminal investigation into Donald…
“At least five senior FBI leaders who were promoted by former Director Christopher Wray have been notified they are being demoted or reassigned, extending a purge that began last week…
“The parents of FTX co-founder Sam Bankman-Fried are exploring ways to secure a pardon for the onetime crypto billionaire from President Donald Trump,” Bloomberg reports. “Stanford Law School Professors Joseph…
President Trump took questions from the media on the plane crash last night in Washington, D.C.: REPORTER: I’m trying to figure out how you can come to the conclusion right…
NPR: “While many people had no criminal record prior to committing crimes on Jan. 6, NPR has identified dozens of defendants with prior convictions or pending charges for crimes including…
“Senators from both parties expressed doubt about Tulsi Gabbard’s judgment during her confirmation hearing to be President Donald Trump’s director of national intelligence, renewing concerns about her prospects for Senate…
“President Trump blamed diversity requirements at the Federal Aviation Administration and his two Democratic predecessors for the midair collision over the Potomac River on Wednesday night, saying that standards for…
After being pressed by senators from both parties to call Edward Snowden a traitor, Tulsi Gabbard repeatedly refused during her confirmation hearing on Thursday morning, Axios reports.Save to Favorites
“The Trump administration is considering a move to halt New York City’s congestion pricing program,” the New York Times reports. “No final decision has been made but President Trump had…
“Obviously, it is not standard to have aircraft collide. I want to be clear on that.” — Transportation Secretary Sean Duffy, at a press briefing.Save to Favorites
Rep. Andy Ogles (R-TN) suggested Thursday that a fatal plane crash could have been caused partly by DEI, or diversity, equity and inclusion in government hiring, the HuffPost reports. Said…
It took less than two weeks for White House Press Secretary Karoline Leavitt to become a liability for her boss. At 27, Leavitt is the youngest person ever to hold…
“A group of six Democratic governors pressed Senator Chuck Schumer of New York during a tense call on Wednesday night to be more aggressive in fighting back against President Trump’s…
“Congress passed a law shutting down TikTok, and President Trump flouted it. Congress required advance notification for firing inspectors general, and the Trump administration ignored it. Congress approved trillions of…
Members get exclusive analysis, a trending news page, bonus newsletters and no advertising. Learn more.
Subscribe
Taegan Goddard is the founder of Political Wire, one of the earliest and most influential political web sites. He also runs Political Job Hunt, Electoral Vote Map and the Political Dictionary.
Goddard spent more than a decade as managing director and chief operating officer of a prominent investment firm in New York City. Previously, he was a policy adviser to a U.S. Senator and Governor.
Goddard is also co-author of You Won - Now What? (Scribner, 1998), a political management book hailed by prominent journalists and politicians from both parties. In addition, Goddard's essays on politics and public policy have appeared in dozens of newspapers across the country.
Goddard earned degrees from Vassar College and Harvard University. He lives in New York with his wife and three sons.
Goddard is the owner of Goddard Media LLC.
“There are a lot of blogs and news sites claiming to understand politics, but only a few actually do. Political Wire is one of them.”
— Chuck Todd, host of “Meet the Press”
“Concise. Relevant. To the point. Political Wire is the first site I check when I’m looking for the latest political nugget. That pretty much says it all.”
— Stuart Rothenberg, editor of the Rothenberg Political Report
“Political Wire is one of only four or five sites that I check every day and sometimes several times a day, for the latest political news and developments.”
— Charlie Cook, editor of the Cook Political Report
“The big news, delicious tidbits, pearls of wisdom — nicely packaged, constantly updated… What political junkie could ask for more?”
— Larry Sabato, Center for Politics, University of Virginia
“Political Wire is a great, great site.”
— Joe Scarborough, host of MSNBC’s “Morning Joe”
“Taegan Goddard has a knack for digging out political gems that too often get passed over by the mainstream press, and for delivering the latest electoral developments in a sharp, no frills style that makes his Political Wire an addictive blog habit you don’t want to kick.”
— Arianna Huffington, founder of The Huffington Post
“Political Wire is one of the absolute must-read sites in the blogosphere.”
— Glenn Reynolds, founder of Instapundit
“I rely on Taegan Goddard’s Political Wire for straight, fair political news, he gets right to the point. It’s an eagerly anticipated part of my news reading.”
— Craig Newmark, founder of Craigslist.
Copyright © 2025 · Goddard Media LLC  |  Privacy Policy | Corrections Policy
Political Wire ® is a registered trademark of Goddard Media LLC