Former chancellor’s intervention exposes deep rift within country’s conservatives over how to handle the far right’s rising influence.
BERLIN — She just couldn’t stay silent.Angela Merkel — three years after stepping down as chancellor — lit a fire under Germany’s election campaign by choosing now to finally speak up.
And it was to criticize her own side.
In publicly chastizing the leader of the party that she spearheaded for more than two decades, and barely three weeks before voters go to the polls, Merkel faces questions over whether her intervention will end up doing the very thing she warned against: boosting support for the far-right Alternative for Germany (AfD).Her rare intervention exposes an internal rift within the conservative Christian Democratic Union (CDU) over how to handle the AfD’s rising influence.She slammed the decision by Friedrich Merz, frontrunner to be Germany’s next chancellor, to rely on far-right votes to pass an anti-immigration motion in parliament.
The deal broke a long-standing commitment to isolate the AfD, which is polling in second place ahead of the Feb. 23 election.
“I consider it wrong to abandon this commitment and, as a result, to knowingly allow a majority with AfD votes in the Bundestag for the first time,” Merkel said in a statement on what Germans refer to as the “firewall” meant to shut out the AfD.
Merkel referred to an agreement Merz made in November 2024, when he explicitly pledged to prevent the AfD from playing a decisive role in Bundestag votes. “This proposal and the stance associated with it were an expression of great state political responsibility, which I fully support in its entirety,” she added.
POLITICO contacted Merz’s team, which declined to comment on the matter.
Merz and Merkel have been at odds inside the CDU at least since 2002, when Merkel effectively exiled him from the party’s leadership. Since Merz’s comeback in 2022, he has shifted the party significantly to the right, in many ways undoing Merkel’s centrist legacy — particularly when it comes to the issue of migration.
The CDU has consolidated around Merz, and criticism among current leaders for his willingness to accept far-right support for anti-immigration measures has been relatively muted. It’s unlikely Merkel’s intervention will stop her party’s rightward shift on migration, but it is fueling an impassioned internal debate on the conservatives’ role in weakening the firewall around the far right.
The firewall controversy erupted this week after the CDU introduced a proposal to reject asylum-seekers at the border. Though nonbinding, the Bundestag vote marked the first time the CDU relied on AfD votes to push through a motion — a symbolic rupture with Merkel’s centrist legacy and the party’s long-standing refusal to work with the far right.
For the AfD, the vote was a watershed moment. “Now begins a new era,” proclaimed Bernd Baumann, a senior AfD lawmaker. The party has seized on the moment as proof that its hard-line stance on migration is gaining mainstream legitimacy.
Populist-right Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán also weighed in, celebrating Germany’s tough-on-migration shift.
For more polling data from across Europe visit  POLITICO Poll of Polls.
“Guten Morgen, Deutschland! Welcome to the club!” Orbán wrote in a post on X.
“Good Morning Hungary!” Alice Weidel, the AfD’s chancellor candidate, responded. “Nice to be part of your club!”
Inside Germany, a center-left backlash against Merz has been swift.
Chancellor Olaf Scholz and his Social Democratic Party (SPD) accused the CDU leader of undermining his “trust,” while demonstrators gathered outside CDU headquarters on Tuesday night, demanding a stronger commitment to keeping the far right out of power.
Merz now faces a potential leadership crisis. While he did not openly endorse working with the AfD, critics argue that his rhetoric on migration and his failure to prevent CDU lawmakers from accepting far-right support have blurred the party’s red lines.
Merkel’s intervention makes his position even more precarious. Though she stepped down as CDU leader in 2018 and left the chancellery in 2021, Merkel remains an influential figure within the party among moderates who see her as a guardian of the CDU’s centrist course.
With just weeks until the federal election, Merz now faces a choice: Double down on his rightward shift or attempt to reassert the CDU’s firewall against the AfD — a decision that could define his political future.
This article has been updated.
The first major survey of voters after frontrunner Friedrich Merz’s controversial alignment with the far right suggests the gambit failed.
Kyiv isn’t totally against the U.S. president’s idea — but the German chancellor isn’t impressed.
Sahra Wagenknecht, whose Russia-friendly party may enter the Bundestag in the upcoming election, added that Trump is “blackmailing” Europe into buying American LNG.
Munich Security Conference gets tough on anti-establishment parties ahead of German election.