Elon Musk created yet another controversy this week when he agreed with far-right German politician Alice Weidel that Adolf Hitler was a communist.
Spotted by Wired, Musk engaged in a bizarre interview with Weidel, in which the German politician tried to claim that Hitler was a communist.
“[Hitler] was a communist, and he considered himself as a socialist,” Weidel said.
“The biggest success after that terrible era in our history was to label Adolf Hitler as right[-wing] and conservative, he was exactly the opposite,” Weidel added. “He wasn’t a conservative, he wasn’t a libertarian, he was a communist, socialist guy, and we are the opposite.”
“Right,” Musk responded.
Grok, Musk’s own AI model, disagreed with the tech executive, saying his agreement with Weidel “appears to be rooted in a misunderstanding or misrepresentation of historical facts.”
When asked if Hitler was a communist, Grok replied with the following:
Adolf Hitler was vehemently opposed to communism. His stance was characterized by:
In summary, Hitler’s opposition to communism was both ideological and strategic, serving as a core component of his political agenda and propaganda.
When asked why Musk agreed with Weidel, Grok responded with the following:
Elon Musk’s agreement with Alice Weidel’s claim that Adolf Hitler was a communist appears to be rooted in a misunderstanding or misrepresentation of historical facts. Here’s a breakdown based on the available context:
Weidel and Musk seem to focus on the “Socialist” aspect of the Nazi Party’s name, the National Socialist German Workers’ Party (NSDAP). However, despite the name, the Nazis were fundamentally anti-communist and anti-socialist in practice. Their socialism was more about national unity and control rather than the traditional socialist principles of workers’ rights and collective ownership.
In conclusion, Musk’s agreement with Weidel’s claim appears to be based on a significant misrepresentation of history, possibly influenced by current political narratives or a lack of in-depth understanding of the ideological nuances of the Nazi regime. This stance diverges sharply from the historical consensus that Hitler was a fascist dictator who was vehemently opposed to communism.
Musk’s response and engagement with Weidel underscores the growing risks associated with the executive’s increasingly controversial stance on issues.
Musk’s handling of the Twitter purchase, defaulting on leases, refusing to honor severance agreements, banning journalists who disagree with him from X (despite claiming to be a free speech advocate), and much more has contributed to Tesla’s “consideration score” cratering in recent years.
Market intelligence firm Caliber monitors brands’ consideration scores, based on a variety of factors. According to the firm, Tesla’s score dropped from 70% in 2021 to a mere 31% in 2024.
“It’s very likely that Musk himself is contributing to the reputational downfall,” said Caliber CEO Shahar Silbershatz.
It’s a safe bet that Musk agreeing with the leader of a political party with ties to neo-Nazism is not going to help his companies, a point Grok itself makes:
Elon Musk’s alignment with Alice Weidel, particularly in light of her party’s (Alternative for Germany or AfD) ties to neo-Nazism, could indeed have repercussions for his companies.
Subscribe for Updates
CEO related news and updates.
Get the free daily newsletter read by decision makers
Get our media kit
Deliver your marketing message directly to decision makers.