German Chancellor Olaf Scholz has denied claims that he is preparing to meet with Russian President Vladimir Putin, labeling them “false.” The Kremlin has also dismissed the speculation, which was sparked by a German MP’s post about an imminent meeting.
On Sunday in Berlin, Scholz sharply criticized Bundestag member Roderich Kiesewetter for spreading what he called “baseless” and “deeply inappropriate” rumors about a potential meeting. The chancellor made the comments while speaking before a leadership meeting of his Social Democratic Party (SPD).
On Saturday, Kiesewetter, a member of opposition Christian Democratic Union (CDU), claimed on social media platform X that Scholz might visit Moscow before February 23. He also suggested that a meeting between Putin and US President Donald Trump is planned for March.
His post, which appears to have been deleted, was no longer available as of Sunday evening.
German government spokesperson Steffen Hebestreit described Kiesewetter’s claims as “defamatory,” “entirely fabricated,” and “malicious.”
“There are no considerations for such a trip; it would make no sense at all,” the spokesperson told RedaktionsNetzwerk Deutschland (RND). He also added that the German government was preparing legal action in response to the claims.
SPD General Secretary Matthias Miersch called for Kiesewetter to delete the post and issue an apology. “Kiesewetter’s tweet is a clear violation of the Fairness Agreement,” said Miersch, referring to the pact signed by Germany’s major parties–SPD, CDU, Greens, and FDP–in December to maintain fair election campaigning, RND reported. Miersch urged CDU General Secretary Carsten Linnemann to intervene.
The Kremlin has also rejected the claims. Spokesperson Dmitry Peskov told TASS on Sunday that “there are no such plans at the moment,” in response to questions about potential high-level talks between Putin and German and US leaders.
Scholz last met Putin in person at the Kremlin on February 15, 2022, just days before the Ukraine conflict escalated. Their most recent communication, initiated by Scholz, was on November 15, via telephone.
In recent months, there has been increasing speculation about potential resolutions to the hostilities between Russia and Ukraine, including the possibility of a ceasefire, or frozen conflict. These discussions have gained momentum following the election of Trump, who has expressed an intention to end the war swiftly.
Ukrainian leader Vladimir Zelensky has stated that Trump’s strength and unpredictability could help, expressing hope that the US president-elect will direct his approach toward Russia.
Moscow has repeatedly said it is open to negotiations and would welcome a diplomatic settlement, but insisted that this is only possible if Kiev ceased military operations, withdrew its forces from Russian territory, including former Ukrainian regions, ensured the rights of Russian-speaking residents, and adopted a neutral, non-nuclear status.
RT News App
© Autonomous Nonprofit Organization “TV-Novosti”, 2005–2025. All rights reserved.
This website uses cookies. Read RT Privacy policy to find out more.