The billionaire Musk has downplayed the party’s extremist views in posts on X and in an op-ed in a German newspaper.
Mega-billionaire Elon Musk, owner of the social media site X, plans to hold an online audio discussion on the platform with the leader of a far right German party, amplifying the party’s fascist and neo-Nazi ideology.
The discussion between him and Alice Weidel, a leader for Alternative for Germany (AfD) and the party’s candidate for chancellor in the February 23 snap elections, will take place”very soon,” a spokesperson for Weidel said, indicating that it will “definitely” happen before the elections. The German-based newswire agency dpa reported that the talk between Weidel and Musk would occur on January 10.
Musk signaled his support for AfD in mid-December, writing in a post on X that “only the AfD can save Germany.” He also penned an op-ed in a German newspaper last week, describing the party as the “last spark of hope” for the country.
Musk’s announcement that he will engage in a discussion with the party’s leader indicates that he may insert himself further into German politics in the coming weeks — much like he did in the 2024 U.S. presidential election, spending over a quarter of a billion dollars of his own money to help elect Donald Trump.
AfD is an extreme right, neo-Nazi organization. The party is vehemently anti-immigration and is particularly bigoted against Muslim migrants. Its leaders have also expressed antisemitic sentiments, and have downplayed the atrocities by Nazi German leaders, going so far as to demand museums and schools change how the Holocaust is taught in schools.
Some AfD leaders have minimized or outright denied the Holocaust. Others have attended neo-Nazi events, including two leaders who appeared at a gathering of neo-Nazis in Switzerland just last month.
Musk has downplayed the party’s extremist views, claiming in his op-ed that a singular instance of one of the party’s leaders being in a same-sex relationship negated its other actions — a dubious suggestion, given that AfD is also opposed to marriage equality in Germany.
Polling indicates that AfD is not currently winning the race in Germany, but is gaining popularity — and other parties may consider forming a coalition with the far right one in order to create a government.
Lawmakers, including current Chancellor Olaf Scholz, are encouraging voters to thwart Musk’s endorsements and to vote for their own interests.
“Where Germany goes from here will be decided by you — the citizens. It will not be decided by the owners of social media channels,” Scholz said in a New Year’s message, a not-so-subtle jab at Musk.
Scholz added that “it won’t be the person who yells loudest who will decide where Germany goes from here,” but instead, it will “be up to the vast majority of reasonable and decent people.”
As Donald Trump is inaugurated a second time, independent media organizations are faced with urgent mandates: Tell the truth more loudly than ever before. Do that work even as our standard modes of distribution (such as social media platforms) are being manipulated and curtailed by forces of fascist repression and ruthless capitalism. Do that work even as journalism and journalists face targeted attacks, including from the government itself. And do that work in community, never forgetting that we’re not shouting into a faceless void – we’re reaching out to real people amid a life-threatening political climate.
Our task is formidable, and it requires us to ground ourselves in our principles, remind ourselves of our utility, dig in and commit.
As a dizzying number of corporate news organizations – either through need or greed – rush to implement new ways to further monetize their content, and others acquiesce to Trump’s wishes, now is a time for movement media-makers to double down on community-first models.
At Truthout, we are reaffirming our commitments on this front: We won’t run ads or have a paywall because we believe that everyone should have access to information, and that access should exist without barriers and free of distractions from craven corporate interests. We recognize the implications for democracy when information-seekers click a link only to find the article trapped behind a paywall or buried on a page with dozens of invasive ads. The laws of capitalism dictate an unending increase in monetization, and much of the media simply follows those laws. Truthout and many of our peers are dedicating ourselves to following other paths – a commitment which feels vital in a moment when corporations are evermore overtly embedded in government.
Over 80 percent of Truthout‘s funding comes from small individual donations from our community of readers, and the remaining 20 percent comes from a handful of social justice-oriented foundations. Over a third of our total budget is supported by recurring monthly donors, many of whom give because they want to help us keep Truthout barrier-free for everyone.
You can help by giving today. Whether you can make a small monthly donation or a larger gift, Truthout only works with your support.
Chris Walker is a news writer at Truthout, and is based out of Madison, Wisconsin. Focusing on both national and local topics since the early 2000s, he has produced thousands of articles analyzing the issues of the day and their impact on the American people. He can be found on most social media platforms under the handle @thatchriswalker.
Get the news you want, delivered to your inbox every day.
As we rise to meet an era of unchecked right-wing authority, we urgently appeal for your support. We’ve set a goal to add 130 new monthly donors before midnight – will you be one of them?