There are once again proclamations that the political tide in Europe is turning against the empire, part of an anti-globalist wave toppling governments in Austria and Germany, and even reaching across the Atlantic to sweep away the likes of Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau.
I’ve lost count how many times I’ve read this prediction. Evidence cited this time in Europe is the collapse of the Austrian government and possible ascendance of  the “right wing, pro-Putin” Herbert Kickl, setbacks for the globalists in Croatia elections, as well as billionaire Trump sidekick Elon Musk’s boosting of the Alternative for Germany.
The fact that European voters are increasingly choosing candidates that are opposed to Project Ukraine and favor better ties with Russia is surely a good sign. A Musk and Trump spotlight could also make it more difficult for the EU and Commission President Ursula von der Leyen to use “tools” to browbeat governments into submission on the question of Russia or encourage national governments like that of Romania to cancel elections when a candidate favoring better ties with Moscow unexpectedly comes out on top.
And yet one key question remains: will we see a marked difference in the vassalage to the US or simply more of an alignment with the incoming Trump administration?
I’m  not sure the anti-globalist label applies all that well to the political parties making waves in Europe, which are not, after all, opposed to global capital, transatlanticism, or the EU.
They are largely a response to the Europe-wide economic downturn driven largely by the disastrous war against Russia. And years of rising immigration combined with low economic growth and austerity have predictably led to improved polling for candidates who are opposed, in theory, to immigration.
They are not all that concerned with neoliberalism, oligarchy, transnational capital, or even militarism. They are also not challenging the fact that Europe is reliant on Washington economically, militarily, and for energy.
And so what does that mean for the citizens of Europe?
For clues let’s look at one of these “anti-globalists” who has been in power for a few years already. She reportedly has Trump’s — and Musk’s — ear and is therefore Politico’s most powerful European politician for 2025. Her response to such a designation?
“…as Spiderman would say, with great power comes great responsibility.”
The Melonization of Europe
Meloni was recently feted at Mar-a-Lago:
Italian Prime Minister Giorgia Meloni has just arrived at Mar-a-Lago pic.twitter.com/VA1A1QswnI
— AlexandruC4 (@AlexandruC4) January 5, 2025
And there’s now a belief that she’s entered the emperor’s inner circle:
BREAKING. According to reports, Italy’s PM Giorgia Meloni is secretly flying to Mar-a-Lago to meet Donald Trump. Foreign minister Tajani was reportedly kept in the dark about her trip. But Elon Musk’s man in Italy posted this before everyone else. So, unlike Tajani, he knew… pic.twitter.com/Uum2mqmp2B
— Antonello Guerrera (@antoguerrera) January 4, 2025
What does Meloni’s welcoming into the emperor’s inner circle signify for Europe? Let’s take a brief look at her record.
Meloni encapsulates the European nationalist upstarts in recent years who have quickly abandoned their rebel bona fides in order to be welcomed into the halls of power. The Sweden Democrats and Geert Wilders’ Party for Freedom in The Netherlands are not dissimilar. In the latter case, the Dutch government of which Wilders party is the largest member continues to do Washington’s bidding against China even though it means running Europe’s most valuable tech company into the ground. Even France’s Marine Le Pen was heading down the Meloni path taking a more pro-NATO line before being sidelined by Macron maneuvers.
Meloni followed in the footsteps of her predecessor, unelected former Goldman Sachs executive and European Central Bank president Mario Draghi, in her support for Project Ukraine. Draghi was an early architect of the economic war against Moscow and grand plans to turn Italy into an energy hub. Both have failed despite Meloni’s best efforts to carry them forward. The ensuing inflation and destruction of industry have had predictable results and continue a long, ugly trend for Italy:
Italy’s real wage misery: inflation-adjusted wages in 2023 were 4.4% lower than in 1990. Even real wages in Greek performed a little better. pic.twitter.com/rRN9QE4JE7
— Philipp Heimberger (@heimbergecon) July 3, 2024
`
Of course, most European workers have started to experience the same over the past three years. The Meloni government carries on with its tepid support for Project Ukraine despite the opposition from the Italian public:
Nevertheless, following her visit to Mar-a-Lago, Meloni had the following to say about the war:
“I have always maintained that the only way to force Russia to sit at the negotiating table was to construct a difficult situation” on the ground, she said. Trump’s first presidency showed he has the ability to “mix diplomacy and deterrence,” she added, predicting it will be the same this time around. Abandoning Ukraine at this point, she said, “would be an error.”
That doesn’t inspire confidence about finding an agreement with Moscow, although it’s unclear how much Meloni’s views represent Trump’s thinking.
If that’s the line she’s pushing, however, she’s not all that different from the Macrons, Starmers, Scholzs, and Trudeas, albeit with different branding. And Meloni is like them in more ways than just on Ukraine.
While her and her government are decidedly “anti-woke” and champion “family values”, they also spend a considerable amount of time working to depict WWII-era Italian fascists as victims of commie anti-Italian racism, blame immigrants for Italy’s woes while still bringing in enough to supply cheap labor, and continue the strip mining of Italy. Last year the Meloni government sold off the fixed-line network of Telecom Italia to New York-based private equity firm KKR, which includes former CIA director David Petraeus as a partner. Elsewhere “Italy Is For Sale,”  with tens of billions worth of privatizations planned for the state rail company Ferrovie dello Stato, Poste Italiane, Monte dei Paschi bank and energy giant Eni. The firesale is necessitated by more tax cuts for the wealthy, as well as more than billions of euros Rome has burned through in order to address the loss of pipeline gas from Russia, which includes buying more US LNG.
A lot to like there from the perspective of a US oligarch. So it’s easy to see why Trump, Meloni and Musk get on so well — even if there are indeed some differences on Ukraine but no doubt Trump will be calling the shots there.
As a reward for being a dutiful subject, Italy is getting a major SpaceX deal.  In return the “nationalist” Meloni only has to surrender more of Italy’s sovereignty.. Musk’s company will be providing security services, including encryption services, to the Italian public sector.
So it would appear that despite all the talk about anti-globalists coming to power in a Europe that Team Trump supposedly wants to extricate itself from, a few things remain the same: the king’s court in Washington expects dutiful subjects in Europe, and in return they might receive rewards.
Musk and the AfD
Musk is also bestowing gifts upon the Alternative for Germany (AfD), encouraging Germans to vote for the party. On its face it might seem a strange turn for an AfD that purportedly favors reclaiming German sovereignty from the EU and NATO to accept assistance from the world’s richest man who happens to also be well-connected with US spooks. Then again, the AfD received its seed money from a reclusive billionaire descendant of prominent Nazis so maybe it’s what one would expect.
While the current political class in Berlin has run the country into the ground and its efforts to silence the AfD, shame its voters, and keep it from power by any means necessary are undemocratic, I view Musk’s sudden involvement not as a victory for Germany, but as an effort to bring the AfD into the US/NATO fold.
That shouldn’t be that difficult. Aside from the AfD’s stated hesitancy about serving American interests — the embrace of Musk might signal a willingness to be flexible there — there really isn’t much difference between the AfD and the European “center” anymore. Last week’s audio livestream alongside party co-leader Alice Weidel on X included an alarming — and telling — ignorance about the history of fascism and communism:
Elon Musk and Alice Weidel (of the far-right German AfD party) put their brains together for a discussion:
Weidel: “The National Socialists (Nazis) were socialist. Adolf Hitler was a socialist.”
Musk: “Yeah, they nationalized industries like crazy.”
Weidel: “He was a… pic.twitter.com/TmDzHqTidM
— Drop Site (@DropSiteNews) January 9, 2025
Under Musk and Weidel’s telling, the Meloni government’s selling off state-owned industry to American private equity is a noble undertaking as it’s apparently the opposite of what Hitler would do. No doubt, Germany should follow Meloni’s lead.
Musk and Weidel are propagating a historical view that fits right in with Atlanticists who have been so busy for so long trying to equate WWII-era Nazism and communism. While originally more of a fringe view, it started to go more mainstream in 2008 when the European Parliament adopted a resolution establishing August 23 as the “European Day of Remembrance for the victims of Stalinism and Nazism” — effectively equating the two Also called Black Ribbon Day, the US in 2019 adopted a resolution to observe the date.
The same year, the European Parliament went even further and adopted a resolution “on the importance of European Remembrance for the Future of Europe.” It proclaims that the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact was responsible for World War II, and consequently that Soviet Russia is as guilty of the war as Nazi Germany.
No matter that the pact, from the Soviet perspective, was agreed to in order to buy itself time seeing as Poland, France and other European states refused to ally with the USSR. If anyone should share more of the blame it would be the West, which preferred Nazism to communism and hoped Hitler would turn the Nazi war machine against the Soviet Union, which he of course did, resulting in 25 million Russian deaths.
Even the nowadays-Russophobic Guardian published an opinion piece by Seumas Milne back in 2009 that admitted this:
…the pretence that Soviet repression reached anything like the scale or depths of Nazi savagery – or that the postwar “enslavement” of eastern Europe can be equated with wartime Nazi genocide – is a mendacity that tips towards Holocaust denial. It is certainly not a mistake that could have been made by the Auschwitz survivors liberated by the Red Army in 1945.
The real meaning of the attempt to equate Nazi genocide with Soviet repression is clearest in the Baltic republics, where collaboration with SS death squads and direct participation in the mass murder of Jews was at its most extreme, and politicians are at pains to turn perpetrators into victims. Veterans of the Latvian Legion of the Waffen-SS now parade through Riga, Vilnius’s Museum of Genocide Victims barely mentions the 200,000 Lithuanian Jews murdered in the Holocaust and Estonian parliamentarians honour those who served the Third Reich as “fighters for independence”.
Most repulsively of all, while rehabilitating convicted Nazi war criminals, the state prosecutor in Lithuania – a member of the EU and Nato – last year opened a war crimes investigation into four Lithuanian Jewish resistance veterans who fought with Soviet partisans: a case only abandoned for lack of evidence. As Efraim Zuroff, veteran Nazi hunter and director of the Simon Wiesenthal Centre, puts it: “People need to wake up to what is going on. This attempt to create a false symmetry between communism and the Nazi genocide is aimed at covering up these countries’ participation in mass murder.”
So with Weidel and Musk’s history lesson we see yet again that there isn’t much light between the “center” and the “far right” except the latter is at least willing to consider good relations with present-day Russia so as to not harm their own economic interests. Trump might be willing to allow that. Elsewhere, they are both in agreement on the broad outlines of militarism and neoliberalism.
Let’s not forget there is another upstart party in Germany who, like the AfD, is also labeled a populist Putin stooge. Its leader has had pie slammed in her face, fake blood thrown on her and is widely derided in the media for opposing the deployment of US medium range missiles in Germany and Berlin’s subservience to Washington. And yet the world’s richest man is not offering Sahra Wagenknecht a helping hand.
Is that because her party, the Sahra Wagenknecht Alliance (BSW) doesn’t have a small core of supporters who are neo Nazis or because her economic policies would favor the working class over the likes of Musk — or both?
Despite all the media efforts to lump Wagenknecht and the AfD together as Kremlin-controlled, anti-democratic far-right threats, the parties are largely polar opposites. Just a few examples:
A German government supported by and run for the interests of a strong working class coalition wouldn’t have to worry about the likes of Musk. Of course Germany wouldn’t be in the position it is in at all because it wouldn’t have been bought off by Americans, but it is now in position of living by the US oligarchs and largely dying by the US oligarchs. As of now, the next German government looks likely to be headed by the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), which is again not that far apart from the AfD — likely to finish second in the February election although probably not strong enough to force its way into a coalition government — aside from the formers belligerence towards Russia and devotion to NATO.
The Musk embrace of the AfD is potentially part of a “suggestion” from the US that the CDU consider forming a coalition with the AfD. If that’s the case, Weidel and company might owe a few favors.
You’d think European anti-globalists and nationalists would be turning and running from the US and the likes of Musk or at least working like mad to find ways to counter American influence. And yet through one of the most magical witches’ brews ever concocted — some combination of bribes, threats, short-sighted self interest, and propaganda — the European political class clings to what is hollowing out their countries.
Perhaps this time it results in a welcome end to Project Ukraine, but the line of thinking that Trump will come in and some new alignment of Orban, Fico, the real Meloni, and company will bring better days seems like wishful thinking at best.
It’s more likely that putative nationalists like Meloni and company are able to rebrand Europe’s vassalage and neoliberalism as some sort of victory against the grating virtue signalling of the Davos cabal while continuing to assist the US in the plundering of Europe.
The Swedish Democrats were against NATO all the time until the parliament vote when they all voted for NATO entry as well as the surrender treaty D.C.A. They also cut social safety nets for the poor, even though they said that they wouldn’t.
All these right-wing parties, incl. AfD etc. won’t bring any change. Economically, they are right-wing parties, meaning always supportive to capital and hostile to workers. They will also fold when the USA bring out their dark forces. These right-wing parties also contain a bunch of fringe people with fringe interests. The leader of Sweden Democrats invited a criminal gang biker to his wedding, of whom the party leader “knew nothing” even though the biker being together with one of the party leader’s “oldest party friends”. There will be plenty of such material in all these AfDs to ply them into any kama vassalage sutra position, US would like to.
https://www-aftonbladet-se.translate.goog/nyheter/a/g6eglJ/akesson-sager-ja-till-nato-om-finland-gar-med?_x_tr_sl=auto&_x_tr_tl=en&_x_tr_hl=en&_x_tr_pto=wapp
https://www-sverigesradio-se.translate.goog/artikel/riksdagen-har-sagt-ja-till-svenskt-medlemskap-i-nato?_x_tr_sl=auto&_x_tr_tl=en&_x_tr_hl=en&_x_tr_pto=wapp
https://www-riksdagen-se.translate.goog/sv/aktuellt/aktuelltnotiser/2024/juni/18/ja-till-avtal-om-forsvarssamarbete-med-usa_cms2fa8b58c-5dc6-455f-b909-95d1d9477599sv/?_x_tr_sl=auto&_x_tr_tl=en&_x_tr_hl=en&_x_tr_pto=wapp&_x_tr_hist=true
For the sake of clarification and to avoid confusion, the right wing extremist party in Sweden is called the Sweden Democrats. The traditional left of centre until Palme was assassinated party that was in power for over 50 years until the late 1970s, and is now all in for Nato and neoliberalism, is the Social Democrats. There is no ‘Swedish Democrats’ party as such. And barely any socialist or traditional trades union supporting party in deed if not name.
Thanks for the correction, JohnA. Updated.
The word “voters” say it all. Muppets are only allowed to vote because the game’s already rigged.
It is very clear what the US has been trying to achieve. As shown by Musk’s support for AfD, the victory of the far right party in Germany will almost certainly lead to a surge in emigration as young professionals increasingly look for exits from economic downturns in Germany. The AfD victory will be the final nail in the coffin for many young professionals.
There is only one place most of them will go to: the US. As the domino starts falling with far right fascist parties gaining power across Europe, more and more European workers especially those with professional degrees will start to flee. Trump and Musk will then hand out H-1Bs to poach the European skilled labor force with ease, maybe even enticing them with permanent residency.
This is the strategic end game of the US since the Ukraine war. The European prosperity is over.
Fascist parties already have power across Europe, but are called democratic/green/whatever. They even fight a war against Russians, just like in the fascist heyday, with similar results.
Complete nonsense, the idea Europeans are going to abandon their social safety nets to go work for H1Bs in the US for what? So that they’ll realize 2/3s of their inflated salaries will go to pay for overpriced healthcare and thousands per month on a 1 bedroom apartment?
It amazes me how around the internet people still believe in this Europeans are dreaming to move to Texas for some shitty IT job on some Musk like vulture capital nonsense.
Young professionals are even more likely to value the last vestiges of EU liberalism and its last breaths, things like healthcare and education are more than enough to make liberal young Europeans stay at home, certainly at least not moving to god damn Texas. Its the complete opposite of your theory. The more likely people to migrate to the US are old middle-upper-class established professionals who have no problem hailing hitler a second time.
Europe is already in austerity budget, with its energy supply controlled by the US. The populist oppositions, if they ever find themselves in government, will have to learn the hard way that economic reform is next to impossible without monetary and energy sovereignty.
Let’s see how long before young people with professional degrees start getting laid off and have to look elsewhere for economic opportunities.
By the way, none of this is new. This was what the US and Europe had done to the developing world for many decades, and to the post-Soviet countries after the collapse of the USSR in the 1990s. Many highly educated talents from the USSR ended up in the West.
It’s Europe’s turn now to suffer from the same fate. It is only a matter of time.
Some observations and what I’ll call clarifications. Conor Gallagher may contradict me.
Meloni was in a weak position when she went to visit Trump in Florida. The Italian authorities had arrested Mohammed Abedini, and the Iranians had arrested Cecilia Sala, ironically, a journalist for Il Foglio, which is a Meloni-nationalist-neoliberal mouthpiece. The arrest of Abedini, natch, was done at the bidding of the U.S. authorities, who still have a whiff of the Abu Omar case about them (overreach and mistakes, but that’s another story).
So Meloni was faced with the choice: Go to synapse-deficient Biden and diplomacy-challenged Blinken, or just go to the current head of state, Trump, who seems to be assuming his duties a tad early.
Meloni went to Trump. The Iranians sprang Sala. Today, I read in Fatto Quotidiano that the Italians dropped the charges against Abedini, who is off now to Teheran.
In spite of a bump up in the polls for Fratelli d’Italia and Meloni, I doubt that this translates into much advantage.
Further, I’ll add that the SpaceX / StarLink deal isn’t a sure thing. It turns out, as recently reported, that President Mattarella expressed doubts a few times over the past couple of years… National security, something rightists blabber about till someone dangles a few coins in front of their noses. Also, I wouldn’t rule out Tajani as foreign minister throwing a brick or two in the path of Elon the Munificent. Tajani has already said that no Italian troops are going to Ukraine.
As I have mentioned, there is also a considerable affection for Russians and Russian culture in Italy. Amusingly, and tellingly, the concert season here in the Chocolate City includes much Shostakovich as well as Tchaikovsky and Stravinsky (hard to get around that darn Tchaikovsky and the Nutcracker Suite). Russian artists are performing. Some no longer are based in Russia, but others must have made it through the visa thicket.
Given that one of the purposes of the Ukrainian embassy and consulate here is to censor, the local “diplomats” must be up late, worried about an impending outbreak of Mussorgsky or Borodin.
The Italian argument is that the charges against him are not a crime in Italy, something that they hadn’t noticed before.
Yes, it was for tech transfer sanctions violations. The Italians could have chosen to enforce or ignore it, since they do have similar laws in place, just different scope of coverage.
I suspect that rising opposition to existing leadership is little more than an impotent electorate’s attempt to throw the bums out. New bums will take over. Security states will reign supreme, spawning wars and domestic repression. Vassalage to Washington will continue unabated, though now publicly acknowledged. And the new bums will neither find nor seek a solution to their dependence on the US’ energy supply/protection racket or to their dependence on other key economic inputs, such as advanced technology.
If the USA is circling the wagons, strengthening its Imperial core and binding its wealthiest vassals to it tighter, in order to loot them, it makes sense that it would favour authoritarian fascist governments in said vassals. Of course, we have seen this film before.
The future for Europe is Latin America. Welcome to the banana republics.
Of course, not all of Latin America was a coup-ridden hell hole. The question is, who gets to be Costa Rica and Uruguay (peaceful, neutral, democratic and rich) and who gets the different flavours of authoritarianism: Central American (violent, poor), Argentinian (from riches to rags) and Chilean (neoliberal economic laboratory)? My guess is that Ireland and Switzerland get to be Costa Rica and Uruguay and everybody else gets to be Argentina or Chile.
‘Musk and Weidel are propagating a historical view that fits right in with Atlanticists who have been so busy for so long trying to equate WWII-era Nazism and communism. While originally more of a fringe view, it started to go more mainstream in 2008 when the European Parliament adopted a resolution establishing August 23 as the “European Day of Remembrance for the victims of Stalinism and Nazism” — effectively equating the two Also called Black Ribbon Day, the US in 2019 adopted a resolution to observe the date. The same year, the European Parliament went even further and adopted a resolution “on the importance of European Remembrance for the Future of Europe.” It proclaims that the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact was responsible for World War II, and consequently that Soviet Russia is as guilty of the war as Nazi Germany.’
This has got to be one of the most vile developments of the past decade or so. How actual Nazis are being rehabilitated in Europe and even Canada. We pretend that there are no Nazis in the Ukraine and ignore all the Nazi symbols. Votes against Nazis in the UN are now being voted against by more and more (mostly western) countries. How Russians, who liberated Auschwitz, are not allowed to attend ceremonies there while Germans, who ran those camps, are actually invited. And trying to pretend that the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact caused WW2 while ignoring how France and the UK totally abandoned Czechoslovakia to the Nazis who had about 50 divisions behind mountains ready to fight. You now have memorials to the victims of communism being erected in western countries but none to the victims of capitalism. I’ll say it now. When you re-write history so that it has no resemblance to historical truth, it never ends well.
It is not of past decade or so. Rehabilitation of Nazis started in 1945, and shifted in high gear in 1991 (especially in Soviet and Yugoslav areas). Westerners did not pay much attention, and are only now seeing the results of their hard work.
One dumb question:
What / who is Musk besides just Musk? Who are we talking about when we say “Musk”? Where is the substance there that amounts to true power?
I have an imagination of a group or even class of people if I think of CIA, Homeland Security or NSA. Hundreds of Thousands of people. Countless offices, Congressmen, Senators, governors, etc. – structures, deep ties, alumni, law firms, families, allegiance etc. – nationhood, governance, normative power in the Schmittean sense.
Same with arms manufactureres, or the gentlemen of Halliburton and Co.
Musk, Thiel, Bezos, Zucker? They appear to me more like actors, diversions, puppets?
When fb did not follow the deep state on censorship – what happened? Sen. Warner called, they came running like school boys and got a major dress down.
Lets imagine Boeing, Lockheed, Northrop had something different on their mind than Mr. Warner – who would call whom in this case? And would there actually be a call at all?
So, why is there constant talk about Musk? Aint’t that mere chirping in the jungle? Isn’t he a clown? And I mean not to denigrate his significance as a guy who speaks to POTUS. But even Kissinger was only as powerful as he served others’  interests. Beyond elections its eventually about structures never individuals.
Which leads me to the next question – who pulls the strings in the EU?
Why is there a clown in the circus? So that the plebs would not pay attention to the men behind the curtain.
Why Musk? Because he has talent and ambition. Why Zucker? Because talent is not necessary.
Thanks for this write-up. That’s the first I’d heard of those crazy privatization schemes in Italy. I thought those had mostly fallen out of fashion as they got too embarrassing. But, it seems they’re not…my god…
Yes, thanks Yves!
Viva La Wagenknecht 🇩🇪
Conor, not Yves :-)
Privatisation has been carried further in the UK than elsewhere in Europe, I believe, and there is still no shame, guilt, or embarrassment about it by the elites. Why should it be different elsewhere?
Viva, yes, but one can do more than just cheer.
According to BSW’s Web site’s FAQ, German law allows foreigners to donate up to €1,000 to political parties without any formalities (contributions above that figure are regulated and must be cleared in advance with the party). BSW is the ONLY nationally-visible political party in the EU that I know of campaigning on social and economic policies reasonably consistent with NC’s advocacy and that occasionally manages to leak its message into mainstream media (though usually as a whipping-boy, as shown in the FAZ link in Irrational’s link below).
Those who want to support some slight chance of influencing sane policy in the west could do worse than to consider a contribution. Their Web site is at bsw-vg.de.
After reading this fully, I will borrow a Yves phrase and give my 50,000 foot overview to describe my take on it: Europe’s increasingly popular so called “far right” is more accurately described as European neoliberals who differ on a few specific policies, AND favor normalizing relations and doing business with Russia. That’s good for Russia and world peace. And significantly, it also points the the probable outcome and solution to Yves quedtion posed in her next article about how will Russia deal with a difficult endgame and “win the peace.”
Weidel is so obviously an establishment stooge it is nearly comical, but the Argentinians have proven that a population can be so easily conned into voting for such an obvious stooge against their own interests. Let’s also remember that the German establishment put Hitler in power after the Nazi vote went down in the second German election of 1932. Hitler never had a mandate from the German people, the 1933 election was utterly fixed and carried out under mass intimidation.
Soon after Hitler got in power he destroyed the SA, the populist wing of the Nazi movement.
The West has, and always will, align itself with fascism (and its worst iteration, Nazism) for the simple reason that fascism protects capital. Thats all its about, freedom for billionaires to continue to rape their citizens, profit from war and create digital feudalism in the name of capitalism.
It’s multipolar neoliberalism.
Too much of the same game, with variations on the labels, are being played on the global political scene.  How are oligarchs reigned in?
Ask Mister Ma of Alibaba fame in China…
Or the guy that wanted to take Putin’s pen.
You know how sausages are made.
The simple fact that in that conversation with Mr. Musk , Weidel so vehemently and obviously attacked none other than CDU, the party closest to AfD and politically Weidel’s home betrayed her true colours and intentions. Deny deny deny. Until you believe it even yourself.
Very well summarised, thank you!
Maybe one could add that capitalism will align with basically anything as long it’s interests are recognised.
Good reality check, Conor G.
Thanks for the post, Conor.
Right in tune with you theory, “economists take apart BSW’s economic program”, apologies behind a pay wall:
https://www.faz.net/aktuell/wirtschaft/mehr-wirtschaft/bsw-wahlprogramm-wirtschaftsforscher-monieren-misstrauen-gegenueber-marktprozessen-110223511.html
As if they are unconcerned about AfD.. oh, wait…
If your vassals can just vote to not be vassals, were they ever really your vassals?
It seems clear that, barring much greater demand destruction, Europe’s dependence on natural gas from the US will keep them paying a crippling tribute, and shaking with every political quiver of the world LNG infrastructure.
First the fake liberals, then the fake conservatives.
Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *
Comment *
Name *
Email *