German Chancellor Olaf Scholz has expressed hope that the conflict between Russia and Ukraine will end in 2025, adding that it’s not yet clear if this is possible. All options to reach peace, including diplomatic means, must be considered, Scholz insisted.
Speaking at a campaign event in Wolfsburg on Friday, Scholz also claimed that Germany is trying to prevent the conflict from broadening, saying that “every effort is made to ensure that this war… does not become a war between Russia and NATO.”
Scholz restated his opposition to sending Ukraine long-range missiles that can strike deep inside Russia, claiming such a move does “not contribute to being a peacekeeping measure from Germany now.” Berlin is doing its best to supply Kiev with arms but “won’t do everything that anyone suggests.” Germany is the biggest supporter of Ukraine in Europe and second largest in the world, he noted.
However, the chancellor underlined that any decisions on peace must not be made “above the heads of the Ukrainians…above the heads of the Europeans.”
Scholz has been criticized by his own foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, for expressing his opposition to an extra €3 billion aid package for Kiev. Baerbock claimed that such decisions contradict “taking real responsibility for securing Europe’s peace and freedom” and prioritize “a national perspective” instead. Scholz had demanded that the aid be funded through additional debt rather than cuts to social spending.
The spat comes ahead of snap elections slated for February triggered by a vote of confidence that Scholz initiated back in December but lost. The coalition government formed by his Social Democratic Party and the Greens has long been divided over economic policy and budgetary issues disputes, including about the extent of financial and military aid to Kiev.
Ukrainian leader Vladimir Zelensky has on numerous occasions expressed his frustration with Scholz for what he believes is the latter’s indecisiveness in sending more weapons to Ukraine. Russia, meanwhile, has consistently expressed strong opposition to Western arms supplies to Kiev. Back in June, President Vladimir Putin called such actions a “serious and dangerous step” that only exacerbates the conflict.
RT News App
© Autonomous Nonprofit Organization “TV-Novosti”, 2005–2025. All rights reserved.
This website uses cookies. Read RT Privacy policy to find out more.