Euractiv +
For individuals
Euractiv Pro
For corporations
Looking to access paid articles across multiple policy topics?
Interested in policy insights for EU professional organisations?
The support of the AfD from Musk, who is set to serve US President-elect Donald Trump’s administration as an outside adviser, comes as Germans are set to vote on 23 February.
News Service Produced externally by an organization we trust to adhere to journalistic standards.
Businessman Elon Musk (C) attends the reopening ceremony of the Notre Dame de Paris Cathedral in Paris, France 7 December 2024. [EPA-EFE/CHRISTOPHE PETIT TESSON / POOL]
Print Email Reddit Facebook  LinkedIn WhatsApp Telegram
US billionaire Elon Musk drew criticism from German politicians from the government and opposition on Sunday (29 December) for an opinion piece he wrote backing the right-wing Alternative for Germany (AfD) which they deemed "intrusive" outside influence.
The support of the AfD from Musk, who is set to serve US President-elect Donald Trump's administration as an outside adviser, comes as Germans are set to vote on 23 February after a coalition government led by Chancellor Olaf Scholz collapsed.
The commentary published in German in the Welt am Sonntag newspaper, flagship of the Axel Springer media group, expanded on a post by Musk on social media platform X last week in which he wrote "only the AfD can save Germany" and praised the party's approach to regulation, taxes and market deregulation.
Elon Musk backs AfD party in German newspaper opinion piece
Shortly after the piece was published online, the editor of the opinion section, Eva Marie Kogel, wrote on X that she had submitted her resignation.
Shortly after the piece was published online, the editor of the opinion section, Eva Marie Kogel, wrote on X that she had submitted her resignation.
In response to the publication of his commentary, the editor of the newspaper's opinion section said on X that she had resigned.
Friedrich Merz, leader of the opposition Christian Democrats and current favourite to succeed Scholz as chancellor, said in an interview with the Funke Media Group: "I cannot recall a comparable case of interference, in the history of Western democracies, in the election campaign of a friendly country."
Merz described the commentary as "intrusive and pretentious".
Saskia Esken, co-leader of Scholz's Social Democrats (SPD), vowed fierce resistance to attempts by state actors as well as the rich and influential to influence Germany's elections.
"In Elon Musk's world, democracy and workers' rights are obstacles to more profit," Esken told Reuters. "We say quite clearly: Our democracy is defensible and it cannot be bought."
Welt's editor-in-chief designate defended the decision to publish the commentary, saying that democracy and journalism thrive on freedom of opinion, including polarising positions.
The AfD is running second in opinion polls and might be able to thwart a centre-right or centre-left majority. Germany's mainstream, more centrist parties have pledged to shun any support from the AfD at the national level.
Print Email Reddit Facebook  LinkedIn WhatsApp Telegram
EU ministers mull new German plan to reinforce asylum rules
Lead MEPs’ pitch for climate tracking group stalls
Operation SHIELD seizes drugs worth more than €11 million
MEPs grill Commissioners on Mercosur money pots
‘No control’: Sweden grapples with bomb violence wave
ECB further cuts interest rates amid Trump tariff fears
Norway’s governing coalition breaks over EU energy rules row
Mutual defence applies in space, says Kallas
Eurozone unexpectedly stagnates as German, French economies contract
EIB to up defence investment to €2bn this year
EU ministers mull new German plan to reinforce asylum rules
30/01/2025
3 min. read
‘No control’: Sweden grapples with bomb violence wave
30/01/2025
2 min. read
Norway’s governing coalition breaks over EU energy rules row
30/01/2025
2 min. read