Euractiv +
For individuals
Euractiv Pro
For corporations
Looking to access paid articles across multiple policy topics?
Interested in policy insights for EU professional organisations?
The US tech billionaire said the upcoming German elections “could decide the entire fate of Europe, maybe the fate of the world”
25 January 2025, Saxony-Anhalt, Halle (Saale): US billionaire Elon Musk video participation in the AfD's election campaign kick-off. (Sebastian Willnow/picture alliance via Getty Images)
Print Email Reddit Facebook  LinkedIn WhatsApp Telegram
Tens of thousands of Germans rallied on Saturday against the far right ahead of next month's legislative elections, as US tech billionaire Elon Musk once again endorsed the anti-immigrant AfD party.
Musk, speaking by video link, told thousands of AfD supporters gathered in the eastern city of Halle that their party was "the best hope for the future of Germany."
AfD supporters at the rally shouted their approval as party co-leader Alice Weidel looked on smiling.
Meanwhile, protesters against the AfD turned out in cities across Germany.
The largest gatherings took place in Berlin and Cologne, with some 35,000 and 20,000 demonstrators, respectively, said police. Organisers in Berlin claimed that 100,000 people attended the protests in the capital.
The protesters there used their mobile phones to form "a sea of light for democracy" in front of the Brandenburg Gate, brandishing letters forming the word "Resistance".
AfD is polling at around 20% ahead of Germany's 23 February elections, a record for a party that has already shattered a decades-old taboo in post-war Germany against supporting the far right.
The mainstream conservative CDU/CSU alliance leads on about 30%, with CDU leader Friedrich Merz the favourite to become chancellor after the elections.
Protests across Germany
Musk, a close associate of US President Donald Trump, told the AfD rally: "I think this election coming up in Germany is incredibly important.
"I think it could decide the entire fate of Europe, maybe the fate of the world."
Musk has rattled European politicians in recent weeks with comments on his social platform X supporting AfD and far-right politicians in other countries, including the UK.
He also drew attention this week for making a public gesture some observers interpreted as a straight-armed Nazi salute, a claim he dismissed as a smear.
Like Trump, the AfD opposes immigration, denies climate change, rails against gender politics and has declared war on a political establishment and mainstream media it claims limit free speech.
The anti-AfD rallies took place in some 60 towns following calls from a variety of organisations, attracting more people than the police had initially expected.
The protests passed off peacefully, with banners saying "Nazis out" or "AfD is not an alternative," a reference to the far-right party's full name "Alternative for Germany".
The CDU's Merz also came in for criticism. Many protestors fear he is tempted to break his party's policy of refusing to enter into coalition talks with the AfD.
There was also a protest in the southern city of Aschaffenbourg, where a deadly knife attack this week by an Afghan migrant further inflamed the debate over immigration.
A few thousand also turned out in the eastern city of Halle, where the AfD rally was addressed by Musk.
"The German people are really an ancient nation which goes back thousands of years," Musk told them.
"I even read Julius Caesar was very impressed by the German tribes," he said, urging the supporters to "fight, fight, fight" for their country's future.
He said the AfD wanted "more self-determination for Germany and for the countries in Europe and less from Brussels", a reference to his criticism of what he sees as heavy-handedness from EU authorities.
Weidel told her rally that migrants in Germany had to be sent home.
"We need re-migration to live safely in Germany," she said.
Print Email Reddit Facebook  LinkedIn WhatsApp Telegram
Updated: 
 27-01-2025
Slovakia’s Fico tones down defence spending opposition after summit
Would-be German farm minister calls for fairness in trade
Commission shares AI Act prohibition guidelines, but doesn’t define ‘AI’
Von der Leyen and Costa to visit UK on 19 May
European shipowners helped build Russia’s shadow fleet, investigation says
Insect food market is losing its buzz
The tech report that threatens the Parliament’s far-right firewall
Disgraced former Chancellor Schröder is being treated for burnout
Stoltenberg shelves international plans to take on finance minister role
Many EU countries are not yet worried about deadly floods
Slovakia’s Fico tones down defence spending opposition after summit
04/02/2025
3 min. read
Von der Leyen and Costa to visit UK on 19 May
04/02/2025
2 min. read
Disgraced former Chancellor Schröder is being treated for burnout
04/02/2025
2 min. read
Belgium gets new nationalist-led government
01/02/2025
3 min. read
EU chief von der Leyen cancels engagements due to pneumonia
03/01/2025
1 min. read
France’s Sarkozy must wear electronic tag after losing graft case appeal
18/12/2024
2 min. read