Sahra Wagenknecht, whose Russia-friendly party may enter the Bundestag in the upcoming election, added that Trump is “blackmailing” Europe into buying American LNG.
AI generated Text-to-speech
BERLIN — Sahra Wagenknecht, a longtime icon of Germany’s far left who is leading her own party into this month’s election, says Donald Trump may be the key to ending the war in Ukraine.
“I don’t consider Donald Trump to be a great bringer of peace. I’m very skeptical of him,” Wagenknecht told POLITICO’s Berlin Playbook Podcast. “But the Russians haven’t said, ‘No, we won’t meet with Donald Trump.’ On the contrary, Putin has agreed to meet. And of course, one must hope that this could lead to a path to peace.”
Wagenknecht is forging a new political force in Germany defined by a seemingly oxymoronic ideology she dubs “left conservatism.” Members of her new populist party, dubbed Alliance Sahra Wagenknecht or BSW for the German acronym, split off from her former party — the Left Party —in 2023. They now now mix elements of hard-left economics with hard-right migration policies.
Wagenknecht also favors closer relations with Russian President Vladimir Putin, and has often been accused by mainstream leaders of parroting Kremlin propaganda when it comes to the war in Ukraine.
The BSW’s possible expansion in Germany’s Bundestag along with a surging far-right Alternative for Germany party, also known as the AfD, following the Feb. 23 election could leave the country’s next parliament with a sizeable faction of Russia-friendly members.
While Wagenknecht’s new party has seen its support slip in recent months, it remains particularly strong in the states of the former East Germany. BSW is now hovering at around 5 percent support nationally in polls, the minimum threshold needed to enter the Bundestag.
Wagenknecht, along with leaders in the AfD, is a vocal critic of Germany’s military support for Ukraine, arguing that the country cannot win militarily.
“Everyone knows Ukraine cannot militarily reclaim the occupied territories,” she said. “So it’s irresponsible to keep sending more weapons instead of focusing entirely on silencing the guns and negotiating a cease-fire along the current front lines.”
Wagenknecht also argued that Germany needs to restore its flow of Russian natural gas, another view she shares in common with the AfD, in order to revive the country’s ailing economy.
“The reality is simple: German industry has no chance without access to Russian raw materials and energy sources. It will collapse, as will European industry,” she said.
“While it’s correct that we shouldn’t depend on Russia, it’s equally dangerous to be dependent on the U.S., as we currently are. We replaced dependence on Russian gas with dependence on far more expensive American gas, and Trump exploits this dependency to blackmail us.”
Wagenknecht also tried to distinguish herself from the AfD, trying to draw voters to her party by arguing that the far right has become too friendly with the U.S. Yet she maintains her skepticism of American power.
The AfD “is campaigning for a ruthless society modeled on the U.S.,” she said. “You’ve noticed how close Ms. Weidel and Elon Musk are,” she said, referring to AfD chancellor candidate Alice Weidel and the American tech billionaire, a close adviser to Trump. Musk has repeatedly endorsed the AfD, and he and Weidel recently had a wide-ranging and amiable talk on Musk’s platform, X.
“The AfD is also increasingly becoming the right-wing arm of Donald Trump in Germany,” Wagenknecht said.
“Germany as a whole isn’t currently seen as a driving force for peace policy in Europe, and honestly that pains me,” Foreign Minister Annalena Baerbock told POLITICO.
Syria’s transitional government “sounds good so far,” Germany’s foreign minister told POLITICO — but actions speak louder than words.
EU leaders are discussing the bloc’s economic woes at gathering in Budapest.
The decision follows a dramatic breakdown of Germany’s three-party coalition government.