Euractiv +
For individuals
Euractiv Pro
For corporations
Looking to access paid articles across multiple policy topics?
Interested in policy insights for EU professional organisations?
The measures received bipartisan support in Germany’s last full work week before federal elections.
This article is exceptionally available for free! Want access to more exclusive content like this? Discover all the benefits of Euractiv Pro.
News Based on facts, either observed and verified directly by the reporter, or reported and verified from knowledgeable sources.
A last-minute compromise will see important tweaks to the German power policy framework. [EPA-EFE/HANNIBAL HANSCHKE]
Print Email Reddit Facebook  LinkedIn WhatsApp Telegram
A majority of German parties agreed on Monday to adopt fixes to the country's energy policy framework, including cuts to solar subsidies during negative price periods.
The remains of Germany's coalition government – the centre-left SPD and the Greens – is unable to command a majority in parliament, leaving it reliant on support from other parties.
But the government found a deal with the the centre-right CDU to tweak the country's power laws, in the last full working week of the German parliament before 8 February elections.
The agreed changes will strip government subsidies from owners of solar panels when prices become negative – when electricity supply exceeds demand and threatens to overhwhelm the grid, which can occur during particularly sunny periods.
"There is... a functioning majority beyond the AfD in the German Bundestag" for the measures, said the SPD's Verena Hubertz. Chancellor-in-waiting Friedrich Merz from the CDU described "reasonable" discussions with the government.
The deal also includes a plan to translate the EU's new CO2 tariff, known as CBAM, into German law. There are centre-right calls to limit the law's scope – so its implementation in Germany will come as relief to Brussels.
Other aspects cover restrictions on wind turbine permitting, the extension of special permits for power plants that generate both electricity and heat, and measures to boost the country's lagging smart meter rollout.
Industry association BDEW said the compromise was "good news for the energy transition."
It may also be good news for Germany's political culture, showing that agreement across the party divide is still possible. In a similar episode before Christmas, CDU leader Merz had intervened to push through the abolishment of a controversial gas tariff.
Berlin to abolish controversial gas transit fee with support from CDU leader
A controversial German gas tariff contested by Central European countries will be abolished on Friday, Euractiv has learnt.
A controversial German gas tariff contested by Central European countries will be abolished on Friday, Euractiv has learnt.
[DC/OM]
Updated: 
 29-01-2025
Slovakia’s Fico tones down defence spending opposition after summit
Would-be German farm minister calls for fairness in trade
Commission shares AI Act prohibition guidelines, but doesn’t define ‘AI’
Von der Leyen and Costa to visit UK on 19 May
European shipowners helped build Russia’s shadow fleet, investigation says
Insect food market is losing its buzz
The tech report that threatens the Parliament’s far-right firewall
Disgraced former Chancellor Schröder is being treated for burnout
Stoltenberg shelves international plans to take on finance minister role
Many EU countries are not yet worried about deadly floods
European shipowners helped build Russia’s shadow fleet, investigation says
04/02/2025
2 min. read
Many EU countries are not yet worried about deadly floods
04/02/2025
2 min. read
Will the EU’s Clean Industrial Deal encourage carbon capture?
03/02/2025
5 min. read
NGOs say EU funds row aims to ‘discredit and defund’ them
03/02/2025
4 min. read
Denmark bets on exports to Germany to beat offshore wind doldrum
03/02/2025
3 min. read
New study doubles EU wind power potential
31/01/2025
2 min. read