Print
Tens of thousands of Germans rallied Saturday against the far right ahead of next month's legislative elections, as U.S. tech billionaire Elon Musk again endorsed the anti-immigrant AfD party.
Musk, speaking by video link, told thousands of AfD supporters gathered in the eastern city of Halle that their party was "the best hope for the future of Germany."
AfD supporters at the rally shouted their approval as party co-leader Alice Weidel looked on smiling.
Meanwhile, protesters against the AfD turned out in cities across Germany.
The largest gatherings took place in Berlin and Cologne, police revising their turnout figures upward to 35,000 and 40,000 respectively.
The protesters in Berlin used their mobile phones to form "a sea of light for democracy" in front of the Brandenburg Gate, holding letters forming the word "Resistance."
AfD polling a record
AfD is polling at about 20% before Germany's February 23 elections, a record for a party that has shattered a decades-old taboo in post-war Germany against supporting the far right.
The mainstream conservative CDU/CSU alliance leads with about 30%, with CDU leader Friedrich Merz the favorite to become chancellor after the elections.
Musk, a close associate of U.S. President Donald Trump, told the AfD rally the election was important.
"I think it could decide the entire fate of Europe, maybe the fate of the world," he said.
Musk has rattled European politicians in recent weeks with comments on his social platform X supporting AfD and far-right politicians in other countries, including Britain.
Like Trump, the AfD opposes immigration, denies climate change, rails against gender politics, and has declared war on a political establishment and mainstream media it claims limit free speech.
Peaceful protests
The anti-AfD rallies took place in about 60 towns following calls from a variety of organizations, attracting more people than the police expected.
The protests passed peacefully, with banners saying, "Nazis out" or "AfD is not an alternative," a reference to the far-right party's full name "Alternative for Germany."
The CDU's Merz also came in for criticism. Many protesters fear he is tempted to break his party's policy of refusing to enter into coalition talks with the AfD.
There was also a protest in the southern city of Aschaffenbourg, where a deadly knife attack recently by an Afghan migrant further inflamed the debate over immigration.
Several thousand also turned out in the eastern city of Halle, where the AfD rally was addressed by Musk, leading to a few incidents.
Halle police said they had opened criminal investigations for offenses including assault, insults and disrupting traffic. They said they would also be taking action against 21 people who tried to force a barrier.