German chancellor answers X owner’s attacks in newspaper interview with German weekly Stern.
German Chancellor Olaf Scholz thinks he’s found the recipe to deal with tech billionaire Elon Musk’s online political fussing.
His approach? “Don’t feed the troll.”
“There are a lot of people on social media who want to attract attention with snappy slogans,” Scholz told German weekly Stern in an interview published on Saturday. “I don’t believe in courting Mr. Musk’s favor. I’m happy to leave that to others,” he said.
The Socialist chancellor’s comments are the latest sally in an ongoing feud with the tech entrepreneur-turned-social media mogul, who has called him “a fool” and claimed he will “lose” the German federal election set for Feb. 23. In this last instance, Musk referred to Scholz as “Oaf Schitz.”
Musk has also barked at other mainstream German politicians, labelling Germany’s President Frank-Walter Steinmeier, who like Scholz hails from the Social Democratic Party, “an anti-democratic tyrant.”
In parallel, Musk has endorsed the far-right Alternative for Germany (AfD) party, sparking a political storm in Germany, charges from Berlin that he is seeking to interfere in the upcoming election, and (another) rebuke from Scholz in his New Year’s address.
The Tesla CEO, who is tapped to play a role in the upcoming U.S. administration thanks to his support to President-elect Donald Trump, has become increasingly influential in politics, using the social media platform X, which he owns, as a conduit to push his views.
He is planning to host a conversation with AfD leader Alice Weidel, who is the party’s pick for the German chancellery ahead of February’s snap election, next Thursday.
In his Stern interview, Scholz vowed to “stay cool” in the face of these personal attacks.
“As Social Democrats, we have been used to the fact that there are rich media entrepreneurs who do not appreciate Social Democratic politics — and do not hide their opinions,” he said.
Marine Le Pen’s protégé pitched the right-wing forces on forming an ‘alternative majority … against the left.’
Jordan Bardella thinks he can convince the European People’s Party to suspend EU climate legislation.
Police say a dispute over money is behind the shooting of Baroness Myriam Ullens.
Pressure from human rights organizations follows a POLITICO investigation into TotalEnergies plant.