Teddy Roosevelt believed in speaking softly and carrying a big stick. Donald Trump will never speak softly, or even politely, but he will soon pack the power inherent in presiding over the world’s number one producer of oil and gas.
Fifty years ago, the US was the world’s largest importer of oil, as demonstrated by the pain suffered during the Arab oil embargo. Now, largely due to fracking, any such future threat is moot while Texas’s Permian basin, in effect the world’s fifth largest oil producer, is expected soon to be responsible for half of all US oil output.
The question now is whether other western countries will embrace this development as a way to break dependence on autocratic regimes like Russia, Iran, Qatar and Saudi Arabia. Particularly promising is natural gas, which provides reliable energy that produces an estimated 40 per cent less carbon dioxide (CO2) than coal and 30 per cent less than oil.
A shift to natural gas, as an intermediate step in reducing emissions, makes sense – that is until politics and climate theology come into the picture. In Europe and in the UK, politicians insist that we will soon be able to get along just fine without evil fossil fuels.
In Britain, such efforts have succeeded in securing a two thirds drop in UK energy production, while demand has fallen only by a third; once a net energy exporter, the UK increasingly depends on imports, even while an estimated 25 billion barrels of oil remain untapped. Studies have shown that oil imported into the UK produces more carbon emissions per delivered barrel than oil produced in the UK.
Now with the highest electricity prices in Europe, and with particularly punishing rates for industry, manufacturing has cratered. Since 1990, the manufacturing share of GDP in Britain has dropped by roughly 50 per cent.
But this misery is not confined to Britain. In the EU, nearly a million industrial jobs have been lost over the past few years. Many will have gone to China and some developing countries.
The primary case study is Germany, a fading industrial power amid high energy prices. The country’s economy is now utterly vulnerable to changes in the weather. Imagine this: Germany’s companies are forced to endure ruinous price increases at times of dunkelflaute – a combination of cold weather, cloud cover and light wind.
Yet even as energy supplies are constrained, the EU and the UK are insisting on a rapid transition to electric vehicles. If kept in place, this will cause Germany’s entire industrial structure to decline, resulting in the potential loss of upwards of 400,000 of its estimated 800,000 auto jobs by 2030.
The only clear winner in this ideology-driven kabuki show is China, which seeks dominion over EVs and other renewable technologies even while it is accused of emitting more greenhouse gases than the entire developed world put together. Now apparently on a coal plant building spree, China’s state-directed economy cynically uses cheap, reliable fossil fuels, and control of critical minerals, to dominate both EVs and the solar-panel industry. Meanwhile, western “green companies”, like Swedish battery maker Northvolt, file for bankruptcy while others suffer massive losses, particularly EV startups.
Even if you accept that China’s dominance is worth the price of “saving the planet”, current energy policies will not create an electrical grid to power it. As demand for EVs and reliance on renewables grow, we could see brownouts even in energy rich Canada and the US in the coming years. The North American Electric Reliability Corporation has found that a deep cold snap would cause outages in swathes of the country.
Across the pond, Europe and the UK are already struggling to build enough capacity to support their relatively small number of electrical vehicles. In Britain, in 2021, the House of Commons Public Accounts Committee admitted that there was a “mountain to climb” to meet transition targets, and doubted that the UK government had “sufficiently thought through” its EV roll-out plans.
The shift to artificial intelligence is likely to intensify this crisis. Microsoft is reported to be opening a new data centre globally every three days. These often loud, intrusive and power-hungry operations could grow from 4.5 per cent of energy demand to 10 per cent by 2035. Firms like Google, a long-time ally of the UN in promoting draconian climate orthodoxy, now admit they are spewing out far more greenhouse gases – about 50 per cent more than in 2019. Microsoft and Google are already estimated to consume as much energy as whole countries, including Ghana, Iceland and Tunisia.
The needs of the tech oligarchs could prove a final push towards energy realism. There has been a growing movement among tech giants like Amazon and Microsoft to encourage the development of nuclear power, although sometimes stymied by the objections of Biden officials. Microsoft even pushed to reopen the shuttered Three Mile Island plant in Pennsylvania.
Whatever the political class decides, reality suggests that the dominance of fossil fuels, even coal, will persist for the foreseeable future. Trump’s “drill baby drill” policies could further entrench this pattern, and offer, in the short-term, a solution to the West’s energy shortfalls. For Europe, reversing President Biden’s ill-considered attempt to stymie the growth of LNG exports, as is now likely, should be seen as manna from heaven.
Energy realism, open to a diverse and changeable mix of sources, is imperative if the United States is to avoid the fate of the last industrial vestiges of Britain and the rest of the green West. If we continue to place all our bets on the sun and wind, we could soon be enjoying living standards consistent not with an abundant future, but more akin to those of the Middle Ages.
This piece first appeared at The Telegraph.

Joel Kotkin is the author of The Coming of Neo-Feudalism: A Warning to the Global Middle Class. He is the Roger Hobbs Presidential Fellow in Urban Futures at Chapman University and and directs the Center for Demographics and Policy there. He is Senior Research Fellow at the Civitas Institute at the University of Texas in Austin. Learn more at joelkotkin.com and follow him on Twitter @joelkotkin.
Photo: Carol Highsmith, via Library of Congress in Public Domain.
Get new posts by email:


Subscribe


CONNECT WITH US:
 

NewGeography.com is a joint venture of Joel Kotkin and Praxis Strategy Group
Joel Kotkin's newest book The Coming of Neo-Feudalism: A Warning to the Global Middle Class is now available to order. Learn more about this title and Joel's other books.
Infinite Suburbia is the culmination of the MIT Norman B. Leventhal Center for Advanced Urbanism's yearlong study of the future of suburban development. Find out more.
Feudal Future Podcast — Changing Education and the Power of TechArmenia Signals Intention to Join the European UnionFeudal Future Podcast — Energy Politics and Pathways to ProgressFeudal Future Podcast — 2024 In ReviewFeudal Future Podcast — Exploring South Africa's Conservative TurnFeudal Future Podcast — From Boardrooms to GovernmentFeudal Future Podcast — Political Parties and Latino Economic PrioritiesWho Are the Winners and Losers from the U.S. Election?Elite Democrats Could be Obliterated by the Decline of New York, Minnesota and moreFeudal Future Podcast — Presidential Politics: Civility, Unity, and the Future of American Leadershipmore
Authored by Aaron Renn, The Urban State of Mind: Meditations on the City is the first Urbanophile e-book, featuring provocative essays on the key issues facing our cities, including innovation, talent attraction and brain drain, global soft power, sustainability, economic development, and localism.
 
Read Michael Lind's new book, Hell to Pay: How the Suppression of Wages is Destroying America.
Don't be so Dense About HousingThese Mayors Understand How to Run a CityThe Dispersing of UrbanismThe Great Train RobberyThe Two Worlds of Buenos AiresFeudal Future Podcast — Madness in the Ruling Class: Who is Leading Our Country?Greenhouse Gas Reduction Policy:  From Rhetoric to ReasonThink Globally, Regulate Locallymore
The Future Of America's Working Class
The Cities Where A Paycheck Stretches The Furthest
The Cities Where African-Americans Are Doing The Best Economically
The Golden State Is Crumbling
Minority America
The Next Hundred Million: America in 2050 By Joel Kotkin - Available Now

The City: A Global History by Joel Kotkin

Why is construction so backward? Co-authored by Ian Abley

Millennial Momentum: How a New Generation Is Remaking America by Morley Winograd and Michael D. Hais

War on the Dream: How Anti-Sprawl Policy Threatens the Quality of Life by Wendell Cox

Remembering the Twentieth Century Limited by Matthew Stevenson

An April Across America By Matthew Stevenson
Burgh DiasporaCenter for Economic Research and ForecastingChina Urban Development BlogChris Bradford - Austin ContrarianHouston StrategiesLA ObservedMultiplier Effect: Levy Economics InstituteNDNNewsalertThe Rural BlogThe UrbanophilePatrick.net - Housing CrashJoel KotkinPraxis Strategy GroupAmerican Association of Retirement Communitiesmore
Username: *



Password: *



Request new password