The foreign ministers of France and Germany have said they want a new relationship with Syria and a peaceful, inclusive transition during the highest-level western visit to Damascus since the fall of Bashar al-Assad’s regime last month.
Jean-Noël Barrot and Annalena Baerbock, the first EU ministers to travel to the Syrian capital since rebels seized control on 8 December, held talks with the country’s de facto leader, Ahmed al-Sharaa, at the People’s Palace on Friday.
The diplomats earlier visited Syria’s notorious Sednaya prison complex and met civil society representatives as western powers cautiously open channels with Syria’s new rulers after 13 years of a devastating civil war that cost more than 500,000 lives.
Related: ‘It was like I was reborn’: Sednaya prison’s former inmates adapt to a new Syria
The trip was intended to show European openness to acknowledging the Islamist rebels, led by Hayat Tahrir al-Sham (HTS), while also urging conciliation, moderation, inclusivity and respect for the rights of Syria’s minorities.
“Our message to Syria’s new leadership: respecting the principles agreed with regional actors and ensuring the protection of all civilians and minorities is of the utmost importance,” the EU’s foreign policy chief, Kaja Kallas, said on Friday.
Baerbock said Syria had “managed something hardly anyone thought was possible” in overthrowing Assad. “It shows how important it is, also in difficult times, to support the people who believe in freedom and justice,” she said. “We want to continue on this path … even though we know it will be a rocky road.”
She said it was “unclear what the future of Syria will look like”.
“There is good reason for people to have new hope, but there is also good reason to be cautious,” she added.
Germany and the EU wanted to help Syria become a “safe home” for all its people and a “functioning state, with full control over its territory”, Baerbock said, adding that despite scepticism about HTS “we must not miss this opportunity”.
Baerbock asked the new rulers to renounce “acts of vengeance”, hold elections soon, and avoid attempting to Islamise the judicial and education systems. The goal was for Syria to become a respected member of the international community again, she said.
Barrot said the two EU heavyweights “stand together alongside the Syrian people in all their diversity” and wanted a “peaceful transition”.
At a meeting with civil society leaders he said he hoped for a “sovereign and safe” Syria, with no room for terrorism or chemical weapons. He told journalists that France and Germany intended to offer technical help and advice on a new constitution.
Hope for the country’s democratic transition was “fragile but real”, Barrot said. Details of the pair’s meeting with Sharaa were not immediately released.
HTS, a Sunni Muslim group previously affiliated with al-Qaida and Islamic State, is still designated a terrorist organisation by numerous national governments but has assured the international community it aims to govern on behalf of all Syrians.
Having led the offensive that toppled the Assad family’s brutal, decades-long rule, the group’s senior figures, who dominate Syria’s interim authorities, face the task of rebuilding the country’s decimated state institutions.
Major questions remain about whether minority rights in Syria’s multi-ethnic society will be properly guaranteed, as well as over continuing malign foreign influence in a country where states including Turkey and Russia have strong competing interests.
Barrot also visited the French embassy, which has been closed since 2012.He met the Syrian staff who maintained the facilities and reaffirmed the need to work towards re-establishing diplomatic representation.
Baerbock said she was travelling to Syria with an “outstretched hand” as well as “clear expectations” of the new rulers, who she said would be judged by their actions.
“We know where the HTS comes from ideologically, what it has done in the past,” she said. “But we also hear and see the desire for moderation and for understanding.”
Western allies were committed to ensuring Syria’s internal affairs were not disrupted by outside influences, she said, and called on Russia to leave its military bases in Syria.
Sednaya prison, not far from the capital, was the site of extrajudicial killings, torture and forced disappearances, epitomising the atrocities committed by the Assad regime against its opponents.
“Now it’s up to the international community to help to bring justice to the people who have suffered here in this prison of hell,” Baerbock said after touring the complex.
Michael Kosta could not believe this moment from the man President Donald Trump wants in charge of Health and Human Services.
President Donald Trump had more questions than answers in his first social post following a mid-air collision between a passenger plane and a Black Hawk helicopter Wednesday night outside of Washington, D.C. The president had earlier confirmed via the White House that he been briefed on the situation, which saw a U.S. Army Black Hawk helicopter collide with American Eagle Flight 5342, sending both careening into the frigid waters of the Potomac River near Reagan Washington National Airport. Thou
CNN’s Kaitlan Collins confronted Donald Trump on his repeated suggestions that the deadly plane crash at Washington, D.C.‘s Reagan National Airport stemmed from governmental diversity, equity, and inclusion guidelines. Trump lashed out at Presidents Barack Obama and Joe Biden’s past administrations for the fatal collision Wednesday evening between the military helicopter and American Airlines flight. He also railed against former Transportation Secretary Pete Buttigieg, claiming he ran the Feder
ANALYSIS: Trump and Starmer have resolved their differences on Lord Mandelson but at what cost to the prime minister? David Maddox reports
Just a little over a week into his second term, President Donald Trump took steps to maximize his power, sparking chaos and what critics contend is a constitutional crisis as he challenges the separation of powers that have defined American government for more than 200 years.  The new administration's most provocative move came this week, as it announced it would temporarily halt federal payments to ensure they complied with Trump's orders barring diversity programs.  The technical-sounding directive had enormous immediate impact before it was blocked by a federal judge, potentially pulling trillions of dollars from police departments, domestic violence shelters, nutrition services and disaster relief programs that rely on federal grants.
Israel on Thursday suspended the planned release of Palestinian prisoners after Gaza militants freed three Israeli hostages and five Thais amid chaotic scenes."Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, along with Defence Minister Israel Katz, has instructed the delay of the release of the terrorists scheduled for today until the safe departure of our hostages in the upcoming phases is assured," Netanyahu's office said.Israel had been due to free 110 prisoners, including 30 minors, in exchange for the three Israelis, the Palestinian Prisoners' Club advocacy group said earlier.A Hamas source told AFP the group was in touch with mediators to "compel" Israel to release the 110 prisoners in the third exchange under the January 19 ceasefire deal aimed at ending the war in Gaza.Israel later said it had received assurance from mediators over the future "safe release" of captives.Another hostage and prisoner release had been scheduled for Saturday, with three Israeli men due to be set free.The prisoner release setback came after militants in Gaza freed three Israeli hostages and five Thais captured in Hamas's October 7, 2023 attack on Israel.Netanyahu denounced what he called "shocking scenes" during the hostage releases in Khan Yunis.Television images showed gunmen struggling to control hundreds of Gazans there to witness the handover."This is yet another proof of the unimaginable cruelty of the Hamas terrorist organisation," Netanyahu said.First to be freed Thursday was Israeli woman soldier Agam Berger, 20, handed over separately to International Committee of the Red Cross officials in Jabalia in northern Gaza.Before she was freed, footage showed her on a stage with masked Hamas members in distinctive green headbands, being prompted to wave to onlookers.Israel's military said the three Israeli hostages and five Thais were now back in Israel.The two other freed Israelis are civilians Gadi Moses, 80, and Arbel Yehud, 29, both of whom also hold German nationality.Netanyahu's office named the freed Thais as Watchara Sriaoun, Pongsak Tanna, Sathian Suwannakham, Surasak Lamnau and Bannawat Saethao.Thailand's Prime Minister Paetongtarn Shinawatra said she was "elated" that they were out of captivity.In devastated Khan Yunis, dense crowds gathered to catch a glimpse of Yehud and Moses ahead of their release near the childhood home of Hamas leader Yahya Sinwar, who Israel killed in October.&nbsp;On Wednesday, the Moses family said it had "received with great excitement the wonderful news of our beloved Gadi's return".The January 19 ceasefire hinges on the release of Israeli hostages taken during Hamas's October 7, 2023 attack, in exchange for around 1,900 people -- mostly Palestinians -- in Israeli custody.Before Thursday, Hamas had released seven hostages, with 290 prisoners freed in exchange.&nbsp;The halt to the prisoner releases led to disappointment for around 300 Palestinians waiting for relatives in Ramallah, in the occupied West Bank."I am so tired. This isn't fair. See for yourself all the families that came to wait and now are uncertain when we will see them," said Raghed Nasser, 21, whose father Hussein was jailed 22 years ago while her mother was pregnant with her.- Aid trucks row -The truce deal has allowed a surge of aid into the devastated Gaza Strip, where the war has created a long-running humanitarian crisis.However, senior Hamas officials accused Israel of slowing aid deliveries, with one citing key items such as fuel, tents, heavy machinery and other equipment.COGAT, the Israeli defence ministry body that oversees civilian affairs in the Palestinian territories, called this "totally fake news".As the text of the agreement -- mediated by Qatar, Egypt and the United States -- has not been made public, AFP was not able to verify its terms on aid.- Displacement 'injustice' -The ceasefire deal is currently in its first, 42-day phase, which should see 33 hostages freed. The Thai hostages are not included in that number.US President Donald Trump has repeatedly claimed credit for sealing the agreement, which took effect before his inauguration, and his Middle East envoy Steve Witkoff, who took part in the talks, met Netanyahu in Israel on Wednesday.Trump has invited Netanyahu to the White House on February 4, according to the premier's office.After the truce began, Trump touted a plan to "clean out" Gaza, calling for Palestinians to relocate to neighbouring countries such as Egypt or Jordan.However, both Egyptian President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi and Jordan's King Abdullah II rejected this.More than 376,000 displaced Palestinians have gone back to northern Gaza since Israel reopened access earlier this week, according to the UN humanitarian office OCHA, with many returning to little more than rubble."My house is destroyed," 33-year-old Mohammed Al-Faleh told AFP."The biggest problem is that there is no water," he added. "Food aid is reaching Gaza... but there is no gas or electricity. We bake bread on a fire fuelled by wood and nylon."Israel cut ties with the UN agency for Palestinian refugees (UNRWA) from Thursday following accusations it provided cover for Hamas, a move likely to hamper delivery of vital services after 15 months of war in Gaza.UNRWA, which has long been the lead agency in coordinating aid to Gaza, will be banned from operating on Israeli soil, and contact between it and Israeli officials will also be forbidden.UN chief Antonio Guterres had demanded Israel retract its order.&nbsp;bur-srm/it
Jessica Tarlov knocked Jesse Watters over his sarcastic remark on federal workers that have been offered buyouts by the president's administration.
U.S. President Donald Trump has refused to pay 290,000 pounds ($360,000) in legal fees after his English lawsuit against a private investigations firm was dismissed, a London court heard on Wednesday.  Trump brought a data protection lawsuit against Orbis Business Intelligence over allegations in a dossier written by its co-founder, former British intelligence officer Christopher Steele, but his claim was thrown out in February last year.
"The View" host said Karoline Leavitt's comments at her first press briefing "really pissed" her off.
All the essential cost of living information you need
Robert F. Kennedy Jr. conceded Wednesday he “probably did” once say that Lyme disease is a “military-engineered bioweapon.” Kennedy’s answer came in response to a fiery line of questioning by Sen. Michael Bennet at his confirmation hearing to become Donald Trump’s health secretary. The Colorado senator—like his Democratic colleagues—asserted that Kennedy’s views on vaccines and diseases were too radical to lead the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
It’s week two of round two and we’re off to a rocky start. Lest President Trump’s faithful grow restless at the early slew of executive orders that did nothing to increase prosperity for the economically anxious, fear not: our invasion of Greenland is just around the corner, and nothing boosts federal spending like a shooting war. Thankfully, as they limber up for our potential conflict against a NATO ally, our military will now be safe from the bane of transgender soldiers honorably performing
The president posts: “Thank you President Trump!!!”
The Federal Aviation Administration’s leader stepped down on Jan. 20, months after Elon Musk demanded that he quit. The move by Michael Whitaker means the FAA has no Senate-confirmed leader for one of the biggest crises in its history because he quit before Donald Trump took office. Whitaker ran the FAA for just a year but announced in December that he would step down on Jan. 20, as the new president was sworn in.
Kyiv is creating some "serious logistical problems" for their opponents.
The NHS will cut 2,000 central manager jobs under plans to divert funds to the front line.
CNN’s Kaitlan Collins talks with Navy Cmdr. Emily Shilling about her status as a trans service member after President Donald Trump signed an executive order banning transgender service members from serving in the US armed forces.
Hamas has handed over a total of eight hostages
Critics slammed the Trump White House counselor's comments on Fox News.
Russia used to rely on Ukrainian expertise for its missile programs, but its actions in 2014 and beyond ended that cooperation.