The incident comes as far-right leaders are embracing increasingly radical proposals to deport migrants en masse ahead of a national election.
The far-right Alternative for Germany (AfD) has sparked a firestorm in Germany after a local party chapter in the southwestern city of Karlsruhe distributed thousands of fake plane tickets to migrants to be deported to their “safe country of origin.”
“In your home country, it’s also nice,” read the flyers, which were labeled with a departure date of Feb. 23, the day of Germany’s national election.
The stunt comes as the party’s national leaders increasingly embrace radical proposals to deport migrants en masse. During a party convention over the weekend, AfD chancellor candidate Alice Weidel said the party would enact “large-scale repatriations” if it comes to power.
“If it’s to be called remigration, then it’s just called remigration,” Weidel declared to applause​, employing a euphemism for mass deportations once used only by the party’s most radical fringe.
“Only remigration can still save Germany,” read the fake plane tickets, according to an image the AfD chapter shared online.
Police are investigating the incident as a possible case of incitement to hatred, according to public broadcaster SWR. The outlet also reported that fake tickets were distributed in neighborhoods with a high number of migrants. The party, however, denied it specifically targeted migrant neighborhoods.
“The election flyer is currently being distributed in Karlsruhe in as large a number as possible and without any particular specifications or restrictions,” the Karlsruhe AfD chapter said in a statement. “It is intended to make voters aware of our proposals in this area, which are fully in line with the legal situation.” The deportation message was directed at noncitizens in the country illegally, the party also said.
The fake tickets sparked an uproar among mainstream political leaders in Germany.
“Nobody will come to Germany if they have the feeling that racism rules here, and that is pure racism,” Greens chancellor candidate Robert Habeck said Tuesday.
Germany’s federal domestic intelligence agency has classified the AfD as a suspected extremist organization. Despite this, the party is currently polling second nationwide, having seen significant growth in support in recent months.
Just a year ago, the party was the object of massive protests across Germany after an investigative report by Correctiv revealed that AfD politicians had been present at a meeting of right-wing extremists, at which a “remigration” plan to deport migrants and “unassimilated citizens” was discussed.
Although the demonstrations appeared to hurt the party in polls at the time, it has since rebounded.
Turkish president threatens to bury terrorists “in the ground with their weapons.”
Western capitals are debating how to engage with the Syrian rebels, who are led by a group that is a designated terrorist organization.
The new infections were detected among the household contacts of the country’s first confirmed case.
“His death is certainly significantly weakening Hamas,” said European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen.