MEDIANAMA
Technology and policy in India
The European Union (EU) is focusing on speeding up its investigation into social media platform X’s violation of content moderation and other provisions outlined by the Digital Services Act, 2022 (DSA), Bloomberg reported. In a letter addressed to EU lawmakers, it was revealed that the probe would be completed “as early as legally possible”.
The letter followed X CEO Elon Musk’s endorsement of German far-right leader Alice Weidel on the platform. The European Commission (EC) will monitor whether X’s algorithms would “deliberately boost” the live-stream conversation between the two, as detailed by Musk’s post. This could violate the DSA, cited Bloomberg.
The EC opened the formal proceedings for the case in December 2023, after the conclusion of a preliminary investigation analysing multiple sources like X’s Transparency and risk assessment reports. Further, the Commission also requested the platform to furnish information about the dissemination of illegal content like Hamas’ terrorist attacks against Israel. The scrutiny focused on the following areas:
In July 2024, the Commission’s preliminary findings disclosed that X’s paid verification system deceived users and prohibited them from truly verifying an account’s legitimacy. Malicious actors also used the platform’s “Blue checkmark” verification system to mislead other users. Further, about transparency measures, the EC stated that X had placed design features and access barriers to make its advertisement repository ‘unfit for transparency purpose’. Besides this, X also compelled researchers to pay disproportionally high fees by granting access only through its application programming interface (API) and otherwise discouraging them from conducting projects. This was in addition to the platform purportedly prohibiting eligible researchers from independently accessing its public data, contradicting its terms of service.
Responding to these findings, Musk said that the EC had offered it an “illegal secret deal” stopping them from being fined if they censored speech. However, Musk claimed that X rejected this deal, while other platforms obliged.
In 2022, soon after his takeover of X (formerly Twitter), Musk reinstated former U.S. President Donald Trump’s account on the platform. For context, X had permanently suspended the infamous right-wing politician from holding an account, citing the “risk of further incitement of violence” and taking into account Trump’s previous tweets. However, Musk has time and again associated himself with the right-wing ideology and is now seeking to influence global politics.
As Germany looks to its federal elections scheduled for February 2025, Musk has now turned to support the country’s far-right party. Noting Trump’s possible influence on the electoral process, France also recently appealed to the EC to use its tools to ‘discourage such behaviour’ or in case of inaction, enable EU’s member states to take action instead.
In addition to X, the DSA has been used to initiate scrutiny against social media companies like TikTok and Meta. The Act aims to create a safer digital space, respecting the fundamental rights of all users and to rein in the power of the four Big Tech overlords: Google, Facebook, Apple, and Amazon. It lays down several obligations for intermediaries including social media platforms relating to transparency, user safeguards, and bans on targeted advertising and dark patterns, among others.
Recently, the European Commission also rejected Meta CEO Mark Zuckerberg’s claim that its data laws (like the DSA) censored social media and instead argued that it only mandated large platforms to remove illegal content. EU issued this statement in response to Zuckerberg’s comments during his broader announcement about loosening Meta’s content moderation policies.
Also Read:
Support our journalism:
Sign up for our Daily Newsletter to receive regular updates
Stay informed about MediaNama events
Have something to tell us? Leave an Anonymous Tip
Ask us to File an RTI
Sponsor a MediaNama Event
Unlike the blue-collar services like plumbing, appliance repair, etc. that are offered by Urban Company, Pyng will offer white-collar services like yoga and fitness trainers, legal advisors amongst others.
From IP addresses to ‘netflow’ data, how much data do telecom companies collect about users and what can the Indian govt do with it?
MediaNama is the premier source of information and analysis on Technology Policy in India. More about MediaNama, and contact information, here.
© 2024 Mixed Bag Media Pvt. Ltd.