Kevin O'Leary: China needs 'a lot more squeezing' than current tariff threat
Schumer ripped for 'expensive' Super Bowl party stunt
Sarah Huckabee Sanders on tariff threat: Trump is tired of America getting ripped off
Karoline Leavitt: Legacy media 'can't keep up' with the president keeping his promises
Jesse Watters: 'Canada needs us more than we need them'
Trudeau: Trump's proposed tariffs in Canada will be paused for at least 30 days
Trump tariffs are 'dangerous game' but good negotiating tools, former Trump economic advisor says
McEnany: This is the fastest concession in American history
Trump, Mexico agree to pause tariffs for one month
Ontario premier questions Trump's move to target 'closest friend': 'We do not understand'
Trump's tariffs on Mexico, Canada are the 'beginning of a negotiation,' says Kevin O'Leary
Trump tariffs on Canada, Mexico, China to go into effect at midnight
Trump discusses recent tariffs with reporters at Joint Base Andrews
Canada wants 'shared growth and prosperity' with the US, premier says
New photos reveal drugs and weapons seized by agents at the southern border
Meeting with Trump, Netanyahu will involve 'far more than Gaza': Ex-Israeli ambassador to US
We 'haven't seen tariffs like this in decades in America,' expert says
EPA has 'important work to do on the ground to fight for the American people,' administrator says
Israel 'will not allow' Hamas to govern Gaza, says retired U.S. general
It would be in 'world's interest' to 'decimate the Iranian nuclear threat while we can': Sen. Lindsey Graham
close      Video Fox News Flash top headlines for January 22 Fox News Flash top headlines are here. Check out what's clicking on Foxnews.com. Two people, including a 2-year-old boy, were killed and three others injured in a stabbing attack in Bavaria on Wednesday. The suspect, a former asylum-seeker who was supposed to be leaving Germany, was arrested.    Chancellor Olaf Scholz said that authorities must clear up why the suspect was still in the country. He said the attack, a month before a national election in which curbing irregular migration is a major issue, must have consequences.'RANDOM' STABBING SPREE AT FESTIVAL IN GERMANY LEAVES 3 DEAD, OTHERS INJURED: REPORT  The attack occurred just before noon in a park in Aschaffenburg, a city of about 72,000 people. Bavaria's top security official, Joachim Herrmann, said the assailant attacked the boy, who was part of a group of kindergarten children, with a kitchen knife.  He said the 2-year-old of Moroccan origin was killed, along with a 41-year-old German man who was passing by and appeared to have intervened to protect the other children. Bavarian officials said two adults and a 2-year-old Syrian girl were injured and taken to a hospital for treatment, and none of their lives were in danger.  Other passers-by chased the suspect and he was arrested 12 minutes after the attack, Herrmann said.  Rescue vehicles are seen near a crime scene in Aschaffenburg, Germany, Wednesday, Jan 22, 2025, where two people were killed in a knife attack. (Ralf Hettler/dpa via AP)He said the suspect, a 28-year-old Afghan national, had come to authorities' attention at least three times because of acts of violence. On each occasion, he was sent for psychiatric treatment and later released.  The suspect is believed to have arrived in Germany in November 2022 and applied for asylum in early 2023, Herrmann said. On Dec. 4, he told authorities that he would leave the country voluntarily and would seek papers from the Afghan consulate. A week later, German authorities formally closed asylum proceedings and told him to leave.Police will work over the coming days to identify his motive, Herrmann said, adding that suspicions so far point to his psychiatric illness. A first search of his room at a refugee home found no evidence that he had radical Islamic views, and only turned up medicine that would fit with his psychiatric treatment, he said.  The attack is politically sensitive a month before Germany's national election.    Scholz issued a strongly-worded statement condemning what he called "an incomprehensible act of terror.""I am tired of such acts of violence happening here every few weeks — by perpetrators who came to us to find protection here," he said. "Mistaken tolerance is inappropriate here. Authorities must clear up at high pressure why the attacker was still in Germany at all."That must lead to "immediate consequences — it is not enough to talk," Scholz added. He didn't elaborate.    CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APPFollowing a knife attack by an Afghan immigrant in Mannheim in May that left a police officer dead and four more people injured, Scholz vowed that Germany would start deporting criminals from Afghanistan and Syria again. He vowed to step up deportations of rejected asylum-seekers following a knife attack in Solingen in August in which a suspected Islamic extremist from Syria is accused of killing three people.At the end of August, Germany deported Afghan nationals to their homeland for the first time since the Taliban returned to power in 2021.