Advertisement


More Stories














                                    The AfD backing from Musk comes as Germans are set to vote on 23 February, folowing the collapse of a coalition government led by the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz.                                                    Alamy Stock Photo





 
German government accuses Elon Musk of 'exerting influence' on parliamentary elections


Musk posted on his social media platform X earlier this month that “only the AfD can save Germany”, despite the party being classified as a suspected extremism case since 2021.






                        2.57pm, 30 Dec 2024                    






12.2k












74






























                        Share options
                    







                            Copy link
                        






                            Email
                        






                            Facebook
                        













                            X
                        










Germany’s government has said that Elon Musk is trying to sway February elections by praising the far-right Alternative for Germany (AfD), a move strongly rejected by major parties.
Musk, a key supporter of US President-elect Donald Trump, and his incoming “efficiency czar”, posted on his social media platform X this month that “only the AfD can save Germany”.
He then doubled down on the claim with an opinion piece for the country’s Welt am Sonntag newspaper, which prompted the commentary editor of the paper to resign in protest.
Translated, Musk’s piece said: “The portrayal of the AfD as rightwing extremist is clearly false, considering that Alice Weidel, the party’s leader, has a same-sex partner from Sri Lanka! Does that sound like Hitler to you? Please!”
Germany’s domestic intelligence agency has classified the AfD at the national level as a suspected extremism case since 2021.
Musk uses populist and personal language to try to deny AfD’s extremist bent.
On Monday, German government spokeswoman Christiane Hoffmann said that “it is a fact that Elon Musk is trying to exert influence on the parliamentary election”.
“In Germany, elections are decided by voters at the ballot box,” she told a regular press conference, adding that the country’s “elections are a matter for Germans”.
Europe’ biggest economy will head to the polls on February 23 after the collapse of centre-left Chancellor Olaf Scholz’s unruly coalition government last month.
Advertisement


Hoffmann said that Musk “is free to express his opinion, but one doesn’t have to share it”.
She recalled that various branches of the AfD have been labelled “extremist” by Germany’s domestic security agency.
Lars Klingbeil, co-leader of Scholz’s Social Democrats (SPD), told the Funke media group that Musk “is trying the same thing as Vladimir Putin”, the Russian president.
“They both want to influence our elections and support the AfD, which is hostile to democracy,” he said, accusing both Musk and Putin of “wanting Germany to be weakened and pushed into chaos”.
Klingbeil said more action was needed on the European level to restrict the political power of big social media platforms such as X.
Musk has repeatedly used X to attack Scholz personally, most recently in the wake of a deadly car-ramming attack on a Christmas market in the eastern city of Magdeburg on December 20.
Musk called Scholz an “incompetent fool” and said he “should resign immediately”.
Musk’s interventions in German politics have also been criticised by Scholz’s main rival, the leader of the conservative opposition CDU/CSU, Friedrich Merz.
Merz labelled Musk’s AfD endorsement as “interfering and presumptuous” and said he could not remember “a comparable case of meddling in the election campaign of an allied country in the history of Western democracy”.
The AfD is in second place in the latest polls at 19%, behind the CDU/CSU opposition, which is at 32%.
The SPD is headed for its worst-ever result at 16%, while its Green coalition partners are polling at 13%.











Author

AFP















                View 74 comments
            

Send Tip or Correction





Embed this post
To embed this post, copy the code below on your site

600px wide
<iframe width="600" height="460" frameborder="0" style="border:0px;" src="https://www.thejournal.ie/https://www.thejournal.ie/german-government-elon-musk-influence-elections-6583022-Dec2024/?embedpost=6583022&width=600&height=460" ></iframe>


400px wide
<iframe width="600" height="460" frameborder="0" style="border:0px;" src="https://www.thejournal.ie/https://www.thejournal.ie/german-government-elon-musk-influence-elections-6583022-Dec2024/?embedpost=6583022&width=400&height=460" ></iframe>


300px wide
<iframe width="600" height="460" frameborder="0" style="border:0px;" src="https://www.thejournal.ie/https://www.thejournal.ie/german-government-elon-musk-influence-elections-6583022-Dec2024/?embedpost=6583022&width=300&height=460" ></iframe>








            Email “German government accuses Elon Musk of 'exerting influence' on parliamentary elections”.
        



Your Email





Recipient's Email






Submit








Feedback on “German government accuses Elon Musk of 'exerting influence' on parliamentary elections”.


Your Feedback




Your Email (optional)



Submit









Report a Comment


Please select the reason for reporting this comment.


                        Please select your reason for reporting...
                    

                        It contains offensive language, is hateful or incites violence
                    

                        It contains a libellous/defamatory statement
                    

                        Some other reason...
                    




Please give full details of the problem with the comment...




Submit









Close










                    74                    Comments
                



                This is YOUR comments community. Stay civil, stay constructive, stay on topic.
                Please familiarise yourself with our comments policy
                here
                before taking part.
            

Leave a Comment












Submit a report

                    Please help us understand how this comment violates our community guidelines.
















Defamation
Damaging the good reputation of someone, slander, or libel.










Racism or Hate speech
An attack on an individual or group based on religion, race, gender, or beliefs.










Trolling or Off-topic
An attempt to derail the discussion.










Inappropriate language
Profanity, obscenity, vulgarity, or slurs.










Spam
Advertising, phishing, scamming, bots, or repetitive posts.










Other







Please provide additional information



Thank you for the feedback

                            Your feedback has been sent to our team for review.
                        





                            Cancel
                        

                            Next
                        

                            Submit
                        

                            Done
                        






Leave a commentcancel
















Log out





Newly created accounts can only comment using The Journal app.
    This is to add an extra layer of security to account creation.
    Download and sign into the app to continue.














 









Access to the comments facility has been disabled for this user
View our policy




⚠️ Duplicate comment




Sign in

                            Post Comment
                        
















Sign in to have your say
Or create a free account to join the discussion







Elon musk
german elections
Germany
Olaf Scholz




















News in 60 seconds












Potomac River Trump says 'no survivors' from Washington plane crash as 28 bodies recovered



                                            Updated
                                        3 hrs ago                






77.5k





161















dáil chaos on the cards No agreement on Lowry speaking rights row with meeting scheduled for morning



                                            Updated
                                        8 mins ago                






6.0k















evening fix Here's What Happened Today: Thursday



                                        13 mins ago                






27















Central Applications Office CAO extends application deadline for those impacted by Storm Éowyn



                                        27 mins ago                






311





0















no change there so NUI graduates re-elect Michael McDowell, Rónán Mullen and Alice Mary Higgins to Seanad



                                            Updated
                                        1 hr ago                






14.5k





45















Storm Éowyn Around 89,000 still without power as Naughton concedes many impacted are at 'boiling point'



                                            Updated
                                        1 hr ago                






4.4k





28















RIP Singer and actress Marianne Faithfull dies aged 78



                                        1 hr ago                






5.9k

















Potomac River Trump says 'no survivors' from Washington plane crash as 28 bodies recovered



                                            Updated
                                        3 hrs ago                






77.5k





161















The Morning Lead 'Inherently unjust': Why a man with no prior convictions was jailed for six years this week





Muiris O'Cearbhaill





                                        20 hrs ago                






46.2k















bankso Irish man dies after falling 600m at Bulgarian ski resort



                                        29 Jan                






30.0k















Courts Family of Limerick student Joe Drennan 'disgusted' by concurrent jail sentence for his hit-and-run killer



                                        3 hrs ago                






27.2k