Euractiv +
For individuals
Euractiv Pro
For corporations
Looking to access paid articles across multiple policy topics?
Interested in policy insights for EU professional organisations?
“If left alone, we could have wiped out the US’ total auto industry,” a Japanese speaker said at Davos. “But at the time, we understood politics”
News Based on facts, either observed and verified directly by the reporter, or reported and verified from knowledgeable sources.
The Economy Brief is Euractiv's weekly economics news roundup.
Print Email Reddit Facebook  LinkedIn WhatsApp Telegram
Deals struck with Japanese carmakers in the 1970s and 80s have been increasingly pointed to as a role model. Going down that route, however, could further dent the EU's perceived commitment to free trade – and sorely backfire.
The topic of heightened competition and trade tensions with China has been all the rage over the past year, both in Brussels' EU boardrooms and across capitals fearing for the fate of their domestic industries.
in September 2023, German Social Democrat Chancellor Olaf Scholz said "competition should spur us on, not scare us," speaking at the automotive trade fair in Munich.
This was one week before European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen – a German Christian Democrat – announced an investigation into Chinese carmakers, arguing that fair competition was distorted by state subsidies in China. Famously, the investigation has led to new tariffs on Chinese electric cars, a move that Scholz has always rejected.
But with the ongoing troubles in European car manufacturing – 88,000 job losses announced last year alone – Scholz’s own voter base is calling for a tougher stance on China.
“There must be a mandatory proportion of European components for all industrial products that are marketed in Europe,” Jürgen Kerner, supervisory board member at IG Metall, Germany’s largest trade union, said this week.
Given the German industry’s dependence on exports and free trade, IG Metall’s call for a “European local-content strategy” resembling the “Buy American” or “Buy China” policies of other blocs, is considered “historic” by other trade unionists.
Bernd Lange, head of the European Parliament’s trade committee – another German Social Democrat and IG Metall member – has weighed in on the debate, drawing a historical comparison with deals that were negotiated with Japan over four decades ago.
In the late 70s and early 80s, European countries clinched agreements on “voluntary export restraints” with Japanese carmakers, limiting their market share in the continent. In France, the quota was set to 3% of car sales, while in West Germany, the agreement was for Japanese cars to grow their market share by a maximum of 1% of overall car sales per year. The bloc later struck similar deals with Korean car makers.
This was followed by a boom of investment of Japanese carmakers into European production facilities in the 1980s, leading to a gradual market opening over the course of the 1990s.
“We negotiated very closely with them 45 years ago in order to generate production in Europe,” Lange told Euractiv.
“By and large, with a few exceptions, Japanese and Korean vehicles are now also produced in Europe,” Lange said. “We should go down this path with Chinese producers too.”
A similar deal was struck between Japan and the US.
“If left alone, we could have wiped out the US' total auto industry,” a Japanese participant in Davos recently said in a session discussing the global resurgence of tariffs. “But at the time, we understood politics,” he argued.
The negotiations between Japan and the US over car exports are a “very good experience to build on,” WTO director-general Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala responded at the World Economic Forum.
But for Europe, a revival of that strategy wouldn’t come without risks. For one, an aggressive negotiation with Chinese carmakers would further erode the EU’s perceived commitment to free trade, from which the Commission already seems to be slowly stepping away in the face of massive industrial policies in other parts of the world.
More fundamentally, such a strategy would accelerate the “local for local” trend that is already taking place in the automotive sector, meaning that production of cars and car parts moves closer to where the cars are ultimately bought.
For the ageing European continent, which has hoped to counter its dwindling appetite for new cars by increasingly shipping them to other parts of the world, this seems likely to backfire.
Whether headquartered in Wolfsburg or Shenzhen, global operating carmakers don’t have a massive problem setting up factories all over the world. But for European auto workers and small suppliers, this trend should be a reason for concern.
Economic News Roundup
What’s behind Europe’s car industry crisis? Europe’s automobile sector is suffering from a range of afflictions including weak demand, factory closures, and difficulties shifting to from making combustion engine vehicles to electric cars. Read our in-depth explainer.
Wait – is there actually a crisis after all? Brussels’s most powerful environmental lobbyist, William Todts, executive director of Transport & Environment, doesn’t think so. “The car lobby has created this whole narrative that they are in crisis and that the EU is to blame for that. This is a complete fabrication,” he told us in an interview. Read more.
The European Central Bank lowers its key rate from 3% to 2.75%, in a widely expected move that many hope will help revitalise the eurozone’s flagging economy. In a statement published on Thursday, the ECB’s Governing Council, the bank’s main decision-making body, cited easing price pressures, “moderating” wage growth, and declining corporate profits as the main reasons for its decision to cut rates for the fifth time since June 2024. Read more.
The euro area unexpectedly stagnated in the fourth quarter of last year, data released on Thursday showed, suggesting that Europe’s economic woes show no sign of abating amid contractions in Germany and France. “For the moment, the economy seems to be in a slump and we don’t expect it to come out of it this winter,” said Bert Colijn, an economist at ING Research. Read more.
Hundreds of German entrepreneurs and business representatives gather in Berlin and other cities to call for a change of government after February's national election. “A lot has to happen before entrepreneurs demonstrate,” Arndt Kirchhoff, an employer representative from North Rhine-Westphalia, said at the flagship demonstration in front of the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin on Wednesday. Germany’s ongoing economic slump, which has seen the country’s real GDP stagnate at 2019 levels, has sparked anger among the country's business community, which is now urging voters to keep the economy in mind when they go to the polls on 23 February. Read more.
The European Commission will take legal action against member states that resist its push to cut regulations, according to a draft Commission proposal seen by Euractiv. The document, entitled 'A Simpler and Faster Europe', notes that “infringement procedures” will be launched against EU countries that are “unwilling to implement agreed rules and policies” that reduce companies’ regulatory burden. Read more.
EU labour unions reject the European Commission’s much-vaunted plan to revive the bloc’s economy. The European Trade Union Confederation said that the so-called Competitiveness Compass, published on Wednesday, makes “countless promises” to the EU’s business community but fails to include “a commitment to a single piece of legislation” that would benefit ordinary citizens. Read more.
EU looks to abandon the World Trade Organisation-led order. Analysts note that the Competitiveness Compass proposes several trade measures that, at best, push the boundaries of what is legally permissible and, at worst, directly contravene the multilateral rules-based order. Read more.
What, exactly, is the Capital Markets Union? For those unfamiliar with (or uninterested in) EU financial affairs, the term can be awe-inspiring – or, more likely, yawn-inducing. Read our in-depth explainer.
EU prepares for Trump’s ‘divide and deal’ policy. The US leader’s inherent disdain for multinational agreements and organisations like the EU significantly increases the likelihood that he will aim to negotiate directly with individual member states, analysts say. However, the EU has several legislative weapons in its arsenal to respond to potential US economic coercion. Read more.
Print Email Reddit Facebook  LinkedIn WhatsApp Telegram
Slovakia’s Fico tones down defence spending opposition after summit
Would-be German farm minister calls for fairness in trade
Commission shares AI Act prohibition guidelines, but doesn’t define ‘AI’
Von der Leyen and Costa to visit UK on 19 May
European shipowners helped build Russia’s shadow fleet, investigation says
Insect food market is losing its buzz
The tech report that threatens the Parliament’s far-right firewall
Disgraced former Chancellor Schröder is being treated for burnout
Stoltenberg shelves international plans to take on finance minister role
Many EU countries are not yet worried about deadly floods
A tariffic mystery? How Trump’s trade policies could impact the EU
04/02/2025
6 min. read
Germany’s CDU joins race to subsidise electricity prices
03/02/2025
3 min. read
ECB further cuts interest rates amid Trump tariff fears
30/01/2025
2 min. read
Germany’s CDU joins race to subsidise electricity prices
03/02/2025
3 min. read
German businesses fed up with outgoing government
30/01/2025
3 min. read
What’s behind Europe’s car industry crisis
30/01/2025
5 min. read