German Chancellor Olaf Scholz has addressed recent comments by SpaceX and Tesla CEO Elon Musk, who expressed support for the far-right Alternative for Germany (AfD) party. Speaking in an interview with Stern magazine published on Saturday, Scholz urged restraint and cautioned against engaging with provocative statements made on social media.
“There are many people on social media who want to attract attention with strong slogans,” Scholz said. “The rule is: Don’t feed the troll.”
The remarks come amid growing scrutiny of Musk’s online activity, which has included criticism of Berlin’s immigration policies and tacit endorsements of the AfD, a party accused of German liberals of promoting extremist rhetoric.
Musk referred to Scholz as an “incompetent fool” in December in a post on X, his social media platform. The billionaire criticized Berlin’s migration policy after it emerged that the man who had mowed through a crowded Christmas market in Germany, killing five and injuring dozens, was an Arab immigrant with a residence permit.
Musk also praised the AfD and expressed support for its anti-immigration stance and said it’s the only party capable of “saving Germany.” He later elaborated in an op-ed for Welt am Sonntag that the right-wing party’s immigration policies are aimed at preserving the nation’s culture and security rather than promoting xenophobia.
Musk’s backing of the AfD is “far more concerning” than personal insults, the chancellor told the German magazine, noting that the party advocates closer ties with Russia and a weakening of transatlantic relationships.
German officials, including Vice Chancellor Robert Habeck, have condemned Musk’s comments, and warned the billionaire against interfering in German politics. “Our democracy cannot afford such external influences,” Habeck said.
Musk and fellow entrepreneur Vivek Ramaswamy have been picked by US President-elect Donald Trump to lead his proposed ‘Department of Government Efficiency’ initiative (DOGE).
Some members of British Prime Minister Keir Starmer’s inner circle have said that Musk could not maintain active support for AfD and Nigel Farage’s right-wing Reform UK party while remaining a member of the new US administration, The Sunday Times reported on Thursday. Such actions would effectively amount to declaring war on the main US allies in Europe, the newspaper’s sources said. The tech entrepreneur earlier also shared a post agreeing with the statement that Reform is “the only way to save” Britain.
Germany gears up for early parliamentary elections on February 23, following the collapse of Scholz’s coalition government due to disagreements on Ukraine aid, economic reforms, and climate policy, leading to a vote of no confidence and parliamentary dissolution in December. Scholz has since been leading a minority government.
The AfD has seen a rise in popularity, with recent polls indicating support of around 17%. However, Germany’s major political parties, including Scholz’s Social Democrats (SPD), have ruled out any coalition with the group.
RT News App
© Autonomous Nonprofit Organization “TV-Novosti”, 2005–2025. All rights reserved.
This website uses cookies. Read RT Privacy policy to find out more.