Elon Musk drove the left-wing media in Germany over the brink by speaking at the Campaign Kickoff event of the Alternative for Germany (AfD) party in Halle, Saxony-Anhalt.
Local state media refused to report on the speech or the kickoff event except for interviewing Antifa hooligans outside the venue.
Elon Musk‘s great speech at our party convention! Make America & Germany great again! pic.twitter.com/XHtMIBfOYh
— Alice Weidel (@Alice_Weidel) January 26, 2025
Here is the full text of Musk’s speech transcribed by “Elon Musk Fan Channel”:
“First of all, I wanted to really say that I’m very excited for the AfD, and I think you’re really the best hope for Germany.
I think some things that are just very important are that people take pride in, Germany and being German. This is very important.
You know, it’s okay to be proud to be German. This is a very important principle. It’s okay.
It’s good to be proud of German culture and German values and not to lose that in some sort of multiculturalism that dilutes everything.
We want to have unique cultures in the world. We want to have people, we don’t want everything to be the same everywhere where it’s just one big sort of soup.
We want to have something where you go to different countries, and you experience a different culture, and it is unique, special, and good.
That the German government takes action to protect its citizens and make sure that it seeks the health and well-being of the German people.
The German people are an ancient nation that goes back thousands of years.
ALICE WEIDEL: MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!
The AfD LOVES DONALD TRUMP!
“We wish you, President Donald Trump and Vice President JD Vance, all the best to Make America Great Again! You’re the best!”
Can you imagine how amazing a MAGA- and DOGE-inspired Germany could be? pic.twitter.com/QVvnGgSmUt
— Naomi Seibt (@SeibtNaomi) January 25, 2025
I was reading Julius Caesar’s account of first encountering the German tribes in the Gaul campaigns, and he was like, wow, very impressive. These are very powerful warriors.
So, I think there’s too much of a focus on past guilt, and we need to move beyond that.
Children should not be guilty of the sins of their parents, their great-grandparents, maybe even.
You should be optimistic and excited about a future for Germany. That’s really my message, is be optimistic, excited, and preserve German culture and protect the German people.
There are some other things that I think would be very helpful too, which is you want more self-determination for Germany and for the countries in Europe, and less from Brussels. That’s my opinion.
I think there’s too much bureaucracy from Brussels, too much control from the global elite. When I’ve given talks at these global government conferences, what I’ve said is there should be less global government.
There should be more determination by individual countries.
Trending: Menendez Stuns Reporters with Remarks About Trump After Being Sentenced to 11 Years in Prison (VIDEO)
And so, I very much hope that the AfD does well, and that Alice Weidel does become Chancellor. I think that would be very good for Germany.
I hope that your people unite and strongly support AfD.
So, you’re doing the right thing, is what I’m saying. Let’s go, guys! Let’s go. Fight for a great future for Germany!
Convince your friends, convince everyone. If you want to make the future great, if you want the future to be great, you need to make it great and fight for the future to be great. That’s how it becomes great.
I think we should fight for an exciting, bright future where people can be optimistic about what’s going to happen.
Where you wake up, and you look forward to the future, and the best way to ensure the future is good is to fight for a good future every day. And it will be great.
So, I think this election coming up in Germany is incredibly important. I think it could decide the entire fate of Europe, maybe the fate of the world. That is the significance of this election.
So, that’s why it’s very important to talk to your friends and family and convince them to consider voting for AfD. And then, just go with it, like a chain reaction. Convince one friend, talk to another friend.
Do you want this? Do you want more of the last 10 years? Or do you want something different?
I think the people in Germany want something different. And if you want something different, you have to vote for a different party. This is just a fact, this is logic.
So, you are the future of Germany. Make it happen.
But I can’t emphasize enough: Go out there, talk to people, convince people, one vote at a time.
There’s a need for change. And this election is so important, it’s extremely important. I do not say it lightly. I think the future of civilization could hang on this election.
Obviously, you have my full support. I think the Trump administration is also supportive.
I think the policies that I’ve heard from AfD make a lot of sense. They’re really just, to me, when I look at the policies, they’re common-sense policies just like President Trump has common-sense policies.
Getting things done, getting the government out of people’s way so that you can get things done and give people back personal freedom, and protecting the people from dangers.
These are fundamental things that, frankly, the current government is not doing.
The current government is suppressing speech very aggressively.
And really, when you suppress freedom of speech, it’s very difficult, if not impossible, to have a true democracy because freedom of speech is the foundation of democracy.
People cannot be expected to vote in an informed manner if they are not able to know the truth.
So, this is why it is so important to have freedom of speech, so people can make an informed vote, and it can be a true democracy.”
WHAT ALICE WEIDEL REALLY THINKS ABOUT ELON MUSK
AfD chancellor candidate Alice Weidel was mocked as an “Elon Musk fangirl” after their space went viral.
She shuts down the haters with her usual coolness:
“I am a fangirl of free speech” pic.twitter.com/7c5eL9UtGm
— Naomi Seibt (@SeibtNaomi) January 23, 2025
Elon Musk’s interview with Alice Weidel on Jan. 9:
Die Unterhaltung mit Elon Musk im Video – mit deutschen Untertiteln. Jetzt reinschauen! #MuskWeidel pic.twitter.com/amAn0sh8fa
— Alice Weidel (@Alice_Weidel) January 9, 2025
You can email Collin McMahon here, and read more of Collin McMahon's articles here.
Sign up now and stay ahead in the political landscape.
Visit GatewayHispanic.com to read news of interest to the hispanic community.
Visit AmericanGulag.org to learn how to help the prisoners of the protest on January 6th.
Visit TGPVideos.com to watch the latest exclusive videos from The Gateway Pundit.
As the mainstream media repeatedly fails and loses public trust, TGP has continued to offer accurate and timely reporting for almost two decades. Visit TGP FactCheck to see how we get it right.
Check out TGP FactCheck to see how terribly wrong the legacy media can get it.
© 2025 The Gateway Pundit
Home
About us
Contact
Privacy
Terms
Get Ad Free