Euractiv +
For individuals
Euractiv Pro
For corporations
Looking to access paid articles across multiple policy topics?
Interested in policy insights for EU professional organisations?
Many economists have criticised the idea of subsidising electricity prices, arguing that efforts should instead focus on increasing electricity supply, such as building new gas-fired power plants.
This article is exceptionally available for free! Want access to more exclusive content like this? Discover all the benefits of Euractiv +.
News Based on facts, either observed and verified directly by the reporter, or reported and verified from knowledgeable sources.
Chairman of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), Friedrich Merz. [EPA-EFE/CLEMENS BILAN]
Languages: Français | Spanish 2025Print Email Reddit Facebook  LinkedIn WhatsApp Telegram
Print Email Reddit Facebook  LinkedIn WhatsApp Telegram
BERLIN - To boost Germany's economic competitiveness, election frontrunner CDU is calling for a sharp cut in the country's electricity prices, echoing similar calls from Scholz's SPD and the Greens.
High energy prices, two to three times higher than in the US, are repeatedly cited as one of the main reasons for Germany's declining economic competitiveness.
“Electricity must become cheaper for everyone,” the centre-right CDU wrote in an “immediate action programme” for a new CDU-led government, adopted unanimously at a party congress in Berlin on Monday.
The party has insisted on the need to cut grid fees and electricity taxes, putting it at the top of a list of 15 measures it would take immediately if it took power, arguing that electricity prices must be cut by five cents per kilowatt-hour (kWh).
If the CDU heads the next government, the measures in the immediate action programme should be adopted before the summer, Carsten Linnemann, the party's general secretary, told the congress on Monday.
“Energy must not be an expensive, scarce commodity,” said Saxony State Premier and CDU member Michael Kretschmer during the debate.
Power prices in Germany are among the highest in Europe, averaging 28 cents per kWh for households and 20 cents for non-household users such as industry, according to Eurostat data.
In addition to cutting the electricity tax, which currently stands at two cents per kWh for residential consumers, while large commercial users are already exempt, the CDU plans to reduce grid fees, which account for about one-third of consumers' electricity bills.
According to energy modeller Marco Wünsch, the plan would cost around €13,5 billion, which the CDU says would be paid for with revenue from carbon pricing.
With its call, the CDU joins the centre-left SPD and the Greens, both of which have previously called for grid expansion to be subsidised to lower electricity prices.
In its election manifesto, Chancellor Olaf Scholz's SPD pledged to cap transmission grid fees at 3 cents per kWh, down from the current 6.6 cents, while the Greens' Robert Habeck also called for government support.
However, many economists have criticised the idea of subsidising electricity prices, arguing that efforts should instead focus on increasing electricity supply, such as building new gas-fired power plants.
“We have also made the energy supply scarcer in part through our own decisions,” Clemens Fuest, head of the influential Ifo Institute, told reporters in January, referring to the country's phase-out of nuclear power plants and plans to close all coal-fired power stations by 2038.
“Supporting energy-intensive industries that are now at a disadvantage in Germany with electricity price subsidies is not sensible,” he said.
Besides slashing electricity prices, the CDU's immediate action programme promises to abolish Germany's Supply Chain Due Diligence Act, cut income tax on overtime, repeal the current government's 'heating law' that bans the sale of gas and oil boilers, and reintroduce a diesel subsidy for farmers, among other things.
[DE]
Slovakia’s Fico tones down defence spending opposition after summit
Would-be German farm minister calls for fairness in trade
Commission shares AI Act prohibition guidelines, but doesn’t define ‘AI’
Von der Leyen and Costa to visit UK on 19 May
European shipowners helped build Russia’s shadow fleet, investigation says
Insect food market is losing its buzz
The tech report that threatens the Parliament’s far-right firewall
Disgraced former Chancellor Schröder is being treated for burnout
Stoltenberg shelves international plans to take on finance minister role
Many EU countries are not yet worried about deadly floods
A tariffic mystery? How Trump’s trade policies could impact the EU
04/02/2025
6 min. read
A Japan-style game plan to save Europe’s auto industry?
31/01/2025
7 min. read
ECB further cuts interest rates amid Trump tariff fears
30/01/2025
2 min. read
A Japan-style game plan to save Europe’s auto industry?
31/01/2025
7 min. read
German businesses fed up with outgoing government
30/01/2025
3 min. read
What’s behind Europe’s car industry crisis
30/01/2025
5 min. read