The German parliament could begin discussing a motion calling for a ban on the right-wing Alternative for Germany party next week, Die Zeit has reported, citing the cross-party group of MPs behind the move. The lawmakers insist that the AfD’s agenda runs counter to the German constitution and poses a threat to the democracy in the country.
The party, which was established in 2013, is currently polling around 20%, ahead of Chancellor Olaf Scholz’s center-left Social Democratic Party (SPD) at 16% and behind the center-right Christian Democratic Union (CDU) on 31%.
Germany’s domestic intelligence service, the Office for the Protection of the Constitution, designated the AfD as a “suspected” extremist organization back in 2021 over its stance on immigration.
The 113-strong group of MPs, composed mostly of Die Linke/Green Party members as well as 31 SPD representatives and six from the CDU, proposed the motion in November. According to Die Zeit on Monday, the lawmakers hope to secure support from the Bundestag for the initiation of ban proceedings against the AfD in the Federal Constitutional Court.
The group claims that the right-wing party has called into question the human dignity of migrants and LGBTQ individuals, with one of the MPs behind the motion, the CDU’s Marco Wanderwitz, calling for swift action against the AfD in light of the party’s supposed “further radicalization.”
A survey conducted in December by the INSA polling institute for Bild indicated that the AfD’s co-leader Alice Weidel was ahead of her rivals in the race to become the next chancellor, enjoying the support of 24% of respondents.
However, even if the AfD were to emerge as the largest party after the snap election on February 23, all of Germany’s mainstream parties have ruled out entering a coalition with the right-wing group, making their ascent to power highly unlikely.
After being officially nominated as the first candidate for chancellor in the AfD’s history earlier this month, Weidel vowed to put the sabotaged Nord Stream gas pipelines back into operation, should her party emerge victorious. She also promised to implement harsh immigration policies and scrap green initiatives.
Last month, the 45-year-old politician also opposed the continued supply of military aid to Ukraine.
Around the same time, AfD co-leader Tino Chrupalla argued that Germany needed to consider “to what extent [NATO] is still useful for us.”
The right-wing party has also suggested holding a referendum on exiting the European Union and the Eurozone.
RT News App
© Autonomous Nonprofit Organization “TV-Novosti”, 2005–2025. All rights reserved.
This website uses cookies. Read RT Privacy policy to find out more.