Tens of thousands of people took to the streets of Berlin to protest what they see as a breach of a taboo in post-war German politics.
The protests came after some parties voted alongside the far-right party, Alternative for Germany (AfD), over a non-binding resolution on immigration last week.
Christian Democratic Union (CDU) leader Friedrich Merz, who is tipped to be Germany's next chancellor, had tried to rely on support from AfD twice last week, including for a bill aimed at curbing immigration.
The move sparked anger among many, with organisers of the demonstration saying people had turned out to condemn what they see as a breach of the country's agreement not to work with the far right at the national level.
The demonstrations come three weeks before national elections and follow similar protests across Germany on Saturday.
Police estimate that about 160,000 people came out to protest on Sunday. The rally began just outside the Bundestag, Germany's parliament building and moved on towards the CDU's headquarters.
Protester Anna Schwarz, 34, told AFP she was joining a political rally for the first because "we can no longer avert our gaze".
"(We want to) make as much noise as possible to call for the self-described 'democratic' parties to protect this democracy," she said.
The CDU is leading in the polls ahead of Germany's snap election this month. The AfD is currently polling in second place, although Merz has ruled out any kind of coalition with them.
On Wednesday, a non-binding motion over changes to immigration law passed through Germany's parliament.
Two days later, a bill aimed at reducing immigration numbers and family reunion rights was rejected by Germany's parliament by 350 votes to 338. The bill was put forward by the CDU and backed by the far-right.
The strategy was widely condemned, including by Merz's predecessor as CDU leader and former chancellor Angela Merkel, who accused him of turning his back on a previous pledge not to work with AfD in the Bundestag.
Merz defended his actions as "necessary" and said he had not sought the party's support.
"A right decision doesn't become wrong just because the wrong people agree to it," he said last week.
World leaders rubbed shoulders with 56 survivors of Hitler's death camp as they marked 80 years since its liberation.
It is 80 years since Soviet Union troops liberated Auschwitz - now marked as Holocaust Memorial Day.
Fifty survivors - now in their late 80s and 90s - will attend a ceremony marking the camp's liberation.
German meat and dairy products are banned in Guernsey after an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease.
Amie, a descendant of a Holocaust survivor, meets Cornelia, who is untangling her family's Nazi past.
Copyright 2025 BBC. All rights reserved.  The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.