German Chancellor Olaf Scholz will meet with French President Emmanuel Macron in Paris Wednesday as the embattled leaders try to chart a new course for Europe with US President Donald Trump threatening to upend transatlantic relations.
Author of the article:
You can save this article by registering for free here. Or sign-in if you have an account.
(Bloomberg) — German Chancellor Olaf Scholz will meet with French President Emmanuel Macron in Paris Wednesday as the embattled leaders try to chart a new course for Europe with US President Donald Trump threatening to upend transatlantic relations.
Despite their many policy differences and weakened positions, Scholz and Macron will try to project strength and will call for a quick response if the US follows through on threats to impose tariffs on European exports, according to people familiar with the plans. They’ll also pledge to speak with one voice when dealing with the new administration in Washington.
Subscribe now to read the latest news in your city and across Canada.
Subscribe now to read the latest news in your city and across Canada.
Create an account or sign in to continue with your reading experience.
Create an account or sign in to continue with your reading experience.
A disastrous snap election last year left Macron marginalized in France’s parliament and German voters are poised to vote Scholz out of office next month. That gives the leaders of the European Union’s two largest economies limited room to maneuver in the face of an aggressive US.
Trump has threatened to impose tariffs on the EU over a range of issues, from the bloc’s trade surplus to not spending enough on defense. Bloomberg reported earlier that the EU has prepared a list of American companies to target with retaliatory duties if Trump does carry through with the threats.
“We will defend free trade as the basis of our prosperity together with other partners,” Scholz said at the World Economic Forum in Davos on Tuesday. “Europe is committed to free, fair global trade and we are not alone in this.”
The meeting between the two leaders won’t be the first time the duo has tried to put up a united front in the face of aggressive foreign powers, even amid their differences.
Scholz and Macron failed over the past three years to build a strong working relationship due to their contrasting views and styles. That difficult dynamic has coincided with the EU navigating urgent issues, such as Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, a sputtering economy and high energy prices.
Get the latest headlines, breaking news and columns.
By signing up you consent to receive the above newsletter from Postmedia Network Inc.
A welcome email is on its way. If you don't see it, please check your junk folder.
The next issue of Top Stories will soon be in your inbox.
We encountered an issue signing you up. Please try again
The stakes, however, are much higher now in the midst of a global reshaping of power dynamics.
For Scholz, European nations can only secure their prosperity if they safeguard a certain openness to their economies amid China’s growing global trade ambitions and Trump’s hostile posturing. The German leader wants the EU to seal more free-trade agreements with countries in South America and beyond.
Macron has a different take on trade. The French president was furious when despite his staunch opposition, the European Commission in December pushed ahead and completed negotiations on a free-trade accord with the South American Mercosur bloc, an agreement backed by Germany.
Similar differences came to light when France last year convinced the commission to raise import tariffs on Chinese electric cars, a move opposed by Germany since it feared Chinese retaliation on German auto manufacturers.
France and Germany will also have trouble finding common ground on security and defense. While Scholz is in favor of loosening Germany’s strict borrowing limits to finance more defense spending at home via debt, he is opposed to Macron’s proposal to go for another round of joint European borrowing to fund defense initiatives.
In February, Macron caught Scholz off guard when he didn’t exclude the possibility of sending Western ground troops to Ukraine during a press conference in Paris that followed a meeting of EU leaders that included the chancellor. The German leader quickly shot down the proposal.
During Wednesday’s meeting, Scholz and Macron will also broach the topic of European regulation of US tech giants.
Scholz and Macron will discuss how both governments can support the EU in its efforts to shield citizens from the growing threat of misinformation and hate speech on social media platforms like Elon Musk’s X and Mark Zuckerberg’s Facebook and Instagram, said the people.
As the EU’s Digital Services Act provides the toolbox for protective measures, Scholz and Macron are likely to agree that Europeans should push against any US attempts to weaken or even abolish those European rules.
“As the European Union, we can also build on our own strength,” Scholz said on Monday. “As a community of more than 400 million Europeans, we have economic weight.”
Postmedia is committed to maintaining a lively but civil forum for discussion. Please keep comments relevant and respectful. Comments may take up to an hour to appear on the site. You will receive an email if there is a reply to your comment, an update to a thread you follow or if a user you follow comments. Visit our Community Guidelines for more information.
365 Bloor Street East, Toronto, Ontario, M4W 3L4
© 2025 Financial Post, a division of Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved. Unauthorized distribution, transmission or republication strictly prohibited.
This website uses cookies to personalize your content (including ads), and allows us to analyze our traffic. Read more about cookies here. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
You can manage saved articles in your account.
and save up to 100 articles!
You can manage your saved articles in your account and clicking the X located at the bottom right of the article.