‘First handshake refused, now THAT’ – German BILD tabloid.
It’s no wonder the failed German coalition led by outgoing chancellor Olaf Scholz is such a train wreck: at the same time that they want to lecture the world on their failed Globalist policies and prejudices, they wanted to jump the gun and be one of the first states to send top-level officials to engage with the ‘moderate’ new Islamist Syrian rulers – and they sent a woman to try to do the job, FM Annalena Baerbock..
Rarely was a disaster so predictable.
BILD reported (translated from German):
“Annalena Baerbock’s visit to Syria on Friday has another aftermath: In Damascus, the new ruler Ahmed al-Sharaa did not shake hands with the Federal Foreign Minister at first – unlike her male companions.
Now comes the next discrimination: Islamist news channels from the environment of the new rulers spread photos of Baerbock’s visit – and censor the German politician in the process!”
The humiliation began at her arrival at Damascus airport: Syrians did not shake her hand – so she shook the hands of German officials instead, with gusto!
Annalena #Baerbock fliegt nach Syrien, um Millionen an das neue Islamisten-Regime zu überweisen.
Die strenggläubigen IS-Gastgeber verweigern ihr den Handschlag – doch Annalenchen strahlt trotzdem dümmlich vor sich hin. pic.twitter.com/ZkDG6yI5fK
— Heidenkrieger (@Heidenkrieger) January 4, 2025
Baerbock then met new Syrian ruler Ahmad al-Sharaa also did not shake hands with the Minister.
video :
video shows Syrian HTS jihadist officials avoided shaking hands with German Foreign Minister Annalena Baerbock @ABaerbock
after she arrived at Damascus International Airport on Friday. #HTS #ISIS #syria #Syrian #German #germany #NewsAlert #news pic.twitter.com/yPbq8TPwsS
— Botin Kurdistani (@kurdistannews24) January 3, 2025
But things were about to get even worse:
“The news channel Almharar distributed photos on Telegram in which the Federal Foreign Minister was made unrecognizable by obfuscation.
Baerbock can only be recognized by her conspicuous casual outfit (light chino pants, light blouse).”
Of course, her male French counterpart Jean-Noël Barrot got his protocol handshakes and is depicted completely unedited next to the Syrian politicians.
“Almharar is close to the Islamist militia Hayat Tahrir al-Sham (HTS), which has just gained power. In other words, the channel is close to the new rulers, but is not an official Syrian news agency like the Syrian Arab News Agency (Sana).”
Sana did show the same photos uncensored.
But the censored images show how ‘moderate and tolerant’ the Islamist new Syria rulers really are.
Read more:
THE ROAD TO DAMASCUS: Huge Christmas Tree Set Ablaze by Islamic Extremists in Syria – Christians Flock to the Street in Protest, Erect a Cross in Its Stead! (VIDEOS)
You can email Paul Serran here, and read more of Paul Serran's articles here.
Sign up now and stay ahead in the political landscape.
Visit GatewayHispanic.com to read news of interest to the hispanic community.
Visit AmericanGulag.org to learn how to help the prisoners of the protest on January 6th.
Visit TGPVideos.com to watch the latest exclusive videos from The Gateway Pundit.
As the mainstream media repeatedly fails and loses public trust, TGP has continued to offer accurate and timely reporting for almost two decades. Visit TGP FactCheck to see how we get it right.
Check out TGP FactCheck to see how terribly wrong the legacy media can get it.
© 2025 The Gateway Pundit
Home
About us
Contact
Privacy
Terms
Get Ad Free