Christian Democrat chancellor candidate Friedrich Merz has taken a surprise trip to Kyiv. He told President Volodymyr Zelenskyy that everything must be done to allow Ukraine to fully exercise its right to self-defense.
Friedrich Merz, the leader of Germany's center-right Christian Democrats (CDU), arrived in the Ukrainiancapital of Kyiv early on Monday.
The conservative candidate for chancellor in the country's upcoming snap elections was visiting the country for the second time since the Russian invasion began in 2022.
Merz said he wanted to use the visit to inform himself "of the present condition of the defense of this country" and assure it of Germany's continued backing.
Arriving by train from Poland, he said he wanted to "help this battered country to continue to defend itself against Russian aggression."
The conservative leader said in a post on X, "the war in Ukraine must end as soon as possible. Only if Ukraine can defend itself will Putin enter into negotiations."
Later on Monday, Merz met with President Volodymyr Zelenskyy.
"We want your army to be capable of hitting military bases in Russia. Not the civilian population, not infrastructure, but the military targets from which your country is being attacked," Merz told the president. He added that restrictions many Western allies had placed on Ukraine's ability to use their weapons was "akin to forcing your country to fight with one hand tied behind your back."
"We must do everything we can to enable Ukraine to exercise its right to self-defence without restriction. And do everything we can to end this war as quickly as possible," Merz said at a meeting with Zelenskyy.
Merz again indicated that he would be far more open to supplying Ukraine with Germany's long-range Taurus cruise missiles. He said that Zelenskyy "knows our position on the Taurus. Nothing has changed in this regard."
At the same joint press conference, Zelenskyy floated the idea of foreign troops fighting on behalf of Ukraine until his country gained NATO membership.
"A troop contingent from one country or another could be present in Ukraine for as long as it isn't part of NATO. But for that we need to have a clear understanding of when Ukraine becomes an EU member and when a NATO member," Zelenskyy said.
The Ukrainian leader also stressed to Merz the importance of European security guarantees in any potential negotiations with Russia to end Russia the war. Ukraine needs security guarantees not only from NATO, but also directly from European countries, Zelensky said
Merz's visit to show support comes at a time when the future of the war is increasingly uncertain. It is not yet known if US President-elect Donald Trump will continue to provide Ukraine with aid, and Ukrainian forces have been losing territory along the Russian border.
Russia has also stepped up drone strikes on energy infrastructure as winter temperatures start to drop across Ukraine.
Merz said Ukraine's allies in Europe must be prepared for any eventualities, and key powers like Germany, France and the United Kingdom "can only develop this strategy together." Zelensky also suggested that Denmark could play an important role.
Meanwhile, the presidential spokesman said that Ukraine plans to call a meeting of its key European allies in December to coordinate a joint position and make sure that Kyiv is in a strong position on the battlefield and in any potential talks.
Germany is the second-largest supplier of military equipment to Ukraine after the United States. So far, Chancellor Olaf Scholz has refused to send Kyiv the longer-range Taurus missiles it has repeatedly asked for. Merz has said that if he is elected in February, he will reverse that decision.
es,dh/rm,rc (AFP, dpa)
While you're here: Every Tuesday, DW editors round up what is happening in German politics and society. You can sign up here for the weekly email newsletter Berlin Briefing.