Roughly 12,000 far-left ‘Anti’-Fascists attacked the convention of the opposition AfD party in Riesa, East Germany, Saturday, erecting roadblocks, attacking vehicles, and demanding ID while police looked on. The so-called ‘Anti’-Fascists proudly posted about their attacks on German democracy.
The military-trained Black Bloc militia was bussed in from around Germany on over 200 busses by George Soros-funded NGO “Campact”.
Alice Weidel wird von der Antifa an der Durchfahrt zur Halle behindert. Ihr Auto wird angegriffen. Polizei räumt gewaltsam die Sitzblockade! #Riesa #rie1101 pic.twitter.com/y2fp0zWm8Q
— JUNGE FREIHEIT (@Junge_Freiheit) January 11, 2025
The AfD is currently the second-most popular party in Germany, gaining another 2% in the two days since Elon Musk’s X Space with party chair Alice Weidel (pron.: “Vydel”) last Thursday, to 22%. Weidel’s armored Mercedes limousine was attacked by about 30 violent ‘Anti“-Fascists on her way to the convention in Riesa, Saxony.
Die ersten Demozüge haben sich bereits in Bewegung gesetzt. „Ganz Deutschland hasst die AfD“, schalt es durch die Straßen. #riesa1101 pic.twitter.com/1GPz194G2A
— NIUS (@niusde_) January 11, 2025
The ‘Anti’-Fascists organized themselves military-style in color-coded militia groups and erected roadblocks on the roads into Riesa, demanding to see ID from people arriving to check against lists of AfD members, who were then forced to turn around while police looked on.
Sie gehen nicht für die Demokratie auf die Straße, sondern bekämpfen die Demokratie.#Riesa #AfDBPT #Antifa pic.twitter.com/oY9CgtliyH
— Kevinini Nö (@KevininiNo8765) January 11, 2025
AfD members reported being led on a wild goose chase of up to five to six hours to reach the convention venue. Democratic parties are required to hold a convention if they want to compete in German elections.
Wenn das am Parteitag der Grünen passieren würde … Brennpunkte, Demokratie in Gefahr, Sondersendungen … #AfDBPT #rie1101 pic.twitter.com/2dOC0EfJwB
— Der Höhlenforscher (@Alexand36926831) January 11, 2025
The convention opened two hours late on Saturday. So-called ‘Anti’-Fascists posted videos proudly bragging about obstructing democracy in the name of “protecting democracy” from the will of the German voter. At least six police officers were injured, and 35 arrests were made.
Die Polizei darf endlich ihre Arbeit machen. Die Sabotage des CDU geführten Innenministeriums hat ein Ende. Der Parteitag musste deshalb 2 Stunden später beginnen. Die Kosten stellen wir der CDU in Rechnung! #AfDBPT #Riesa pic.twitter.com/aempiBTB53
— Thorsten Weiß, MdA (@WeissAfD) January 11, 2025
The massive attack on democracy was organized and funded by the left-wing network around George Soros funded “Campact”, the German version of Soros/Podesta funded “MoveOn.” Campact published lists of busses transporting their street guerilla to Riesa on the website “widersetzen” (Resist). “Campact Democracy Foundation” was funded with $300,000 by the Open Society Foundations in 2021.
The donation account was run by the “Antifascist League” (VVN-BdA), which was designated “the lead organization of radical left-wing Antifascism” by Bavarian State Police.
Aus ganz Deutschland wurden Linksextremisten herangekarrt, um den Parteitag der #AfD in #Riesa zu verhindern. Seit den frühen Morgenstunden kommt es zu schweren Krawallen. Dabei versuchen die Antifa-Anhänger – offenbar generalstabsmäßig geplant – sämtliche Zufahrtsstraßen in die… pic.twitter.com/Qi7jpYUDuH
— Lexa (@rebew_lexa) January 11, 2025
You can email Collin McMahon here, and read more of Collin McMahon's articles here.
Sign up now and stay ahead in the political landscape.
Visit GatewayHispanic.com to read news of interest to the hispanic community.
Visit AmericanGulag.org to learn how to help the prisoners of the protest on January 6th.
Visit TGPVideos.com to watch the latest exclusive videos from The Gateway Pundit.
As the mainstream media repeatedly fails and loses public trust, TGP has continued to offer accurate and timely reporting for almost two decades. Visit TGP FactCheck to see how we get it right.
Check out TGP FactCheck to see how terribly wrong the legacy media can get it.
© 2025 The Gateway Pundit
Home
About us
Contact
Privacy
Terms
Get Ad Free