Tech entrepreneur Elon Musk has hosted a lengthy conversation with the co-chair of the right-wing Alternative for Germany (AfD) party, Alice Weidel. Up to 150 experts were expected to monitor the talk livestreamed on X on Thursday evening for potential violations of Germany’s election laws, according to Politico.
Musk earlier ruffled feathers in Berlin by praising the AfD’s policies, including its tough stance on immigration. During his talk with Weidel, he reaffirmed his belief that “only AfD can save Germany” ahead of the 2025 parliamentary election.
Merkel ‘ruined’ Germany
Weidel slammed former Chancellor Angela Merkel for her ‘open-door policy’ during the 2015 migrant crisis, when Germany accepted around 1 million asylum seekers from Africa and the Middle East.
Merkel “basically ruined our country,” Weidel stated, arguing that the phaseout of cheap nuclear energy “destroyed the backbone” of the German economy.
Germany has shut down its nuclear plants, becoming the only industrial nation to do so, the AfD leader said. In 2011, the German parliament closed the plants in the wake of the Fukushima disaster in Japan. The last reactor was shut down in 2023, two years after Merkel stepped down as chancellor.
Weidel said Germany should reintroduce nuclear power as a cheaper alternative to green energy promoted by Berlin. Musk, who has described himself as “a big fan of solar energy,” suggested that Germany should not only reopen its nuclear power plants but “significantly increase” their output.
Immigration takes toll on taxpayers
Weidel criticized the government for fostering “immigration into the social system,” which consumes a significant share of taxpayer money.
Over 7 million people have arrived in Germany since 2015, the politician claimed, adding that almost 60% of them got rid of their ID papers to complicate potential deportation procedures. She blamed the situation on the lax attitude to migrants during the Merkel era. Musk said the US has to deal with a similar influx of undocumented migrants through its border with Mexico.
According to the German Federal Statistical Office, over 14 million ‘non-Germans’ arrived in the country from 2015 to 2023. The report did not specify whether they came from other EU nations or from outside the bloc. The federal and regional authorities spent €6.29 billion ($6.48 billion) as part of the asylum seekers’ benefits program in 2023 alone, according to government data.
Libertarian conservative party
The Alternative for Germany is a “libertarian conservative party” that fights bureaucracy and seeks to “free the people from the state” by reducing the role of the government in public life, Weidel said.  She added that she wants to see “self-confident people” enjoying freedom of speech and generating wealth.
Weidel complained that her party is being “negatively framed” by the media. She thanked Musk for a “normal conversation” in which she was not being “interrupted” on a regular basis.
She repeatedly rejected comparisons between AfD and the Nazis, arguing that Adolf Hitler was neither a libertarian nor a conservative.
Current and former AfD members, including Thuringia leader Bjoern Hoecke, have made controversial statements regarding Germany’s Nazi past and have been accused of links to neo-Nazi groups. For this reason, all other major parties have mostly refused to work with the AfD. In 2021, Germany’s domestic security agency (BfV) classified the AfD as a “suspected” extremist group. The party unsuccessfully contested the designation in court.
Censorship is what Hitler did
Musk and Weidel blasted EU officials for monitoring their conversation and engaging in “censorship of free speech.” They agreed that free speech is a “bedrock of democracy,” while “extreme censorship” helped Hitler cement his power.
“For those who want censorship, I think they should be careful what they ask for because once you institute censorship, it’s only a matter of time before that censorship is turned [against] you,” Musk said.
Israeli-Palestinian conflict ‘complicated’
Weidel expressed support for Israel, describing her party as the “only protector” of Jews in Germany. At the same time, she stressed that the people of Gaza should have access to drinking water and other basic resources.
The Israel-Palestine conflict is “complicated,” and there is not an obvious solution at the moment, she said.
Musk proposed steps he said would help bring about an end to the fighting, such as the “elimination” of Hamas and other forces that seek the “destruction” of Israel. He called for “fixing” the Palestinian education system. The Palestinian territories should be prosperous, he said.
“I think there is great wisdom in forgiveness,” Musk stressed. “It is the only way to stop the endless cycle of violence.”
EU ‘has given up’ and only escalates with Russia
The Russia-Ukraine conflict demonstrates how much the EU has “given up on everything” and is reliant on the US, Weidel said. She stated that, while the ongoing hostilities are a “big danger” to European security, the EU has only managed to “escalate the entire conflict [with] Russia.”
“It is very dangerous what is going on here,” she stated, adding that EU countries “have no strategy” and “no red lines.” The conflict could “escalate big time towards a nuclear exchange,” she warned.
Musk expressed hope that US President-elect Donald Trump can quickly resolve the crisis, but refused to comment on the incoming administration’s plans. He argued that prolonging the conflict would only weaken Ukraine, which is a “smaller country” and cannot afford major losses.
Colonizing Mars could save the human race
Asked by Weidel about the reasoning behind his desire to colonize Mars, Musk said it is a “way to ensure the long-term survival of life as we know it.” The endeavor could preserve humanity in case of a global natural or man-made disaster, he argued. There is an “added risk for humans that we could destroy ourselves,” Musk said, warning that the “window of opportunity” could be shorter than people expect.
Setting foot on Mars is “not so much [about] flags and footprints,” but about the establishment of a self-sufficient colony that could require “a million tons of cargo” and a million people, Musk said.
RT News App
© Autonomous Nonprofit Organization “TV-Novosti”, 2005–2025. All rights reserved.
This website uses cookies. Read RT Privacy policy to find out more.