German Chancellor Olaf Scholz has accused his critics of deceiving voters about his reluctance to approve a proposed €3 billion ($3.1 billion) assistance package for Kiev. Senior officials have blamed Scholz for delaying the emergency aid, which was proposed by Foreign Minister Annalena Baerbock and Defense Minister Boris Pistorius.
The chancellor has claimed that those backing the deal are not being transparent about how it would be financed.
“The German people are being lied to” by those who refuse to address how the package would be funded, Scholz claimed in an interview with the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung newspaper on Monday.
The issue of Ukraine aid is a focal point of political debates ahead of the general election in Germany next month. The Social Democratic Party (SPD) has nominated Scholz as its candidate to form the next government, after Pistorius declined to seek the party’s nomination despite his popularity exceeding the chancellor’s in some polls.
Baerbock, a senior member of the Green Party, complained last week about unnamed officials prioritizing national interests over “responsibility for securing Europe’s peace” to appeal to voters. Her party was part of the ruling coalition which collapsed last year over a conflict with the SPD and the Free Democratic Party (FDP) over spending priorities.
Friedrich Merz, the chancellorship candidate from the opposition Christian Democrats, has likewise criticized Scholz for not providing more aid to Ukraine. Merz is currently seen as the frontrunner for chancellor, with the Christian Democratic Union/Christian Social Union alliance leading in opinion polls.
Alternative for Germany (AfD), an anti-immigration party, stands out among major political players in its opposition to funding Kiev’s fight against Moscow, and has called for the resumption of purchases of cheap Russian energy to kickstart the ailing German economy. It currently trails the Christian Democrats in the polls, as MPs reportedly mull banning it for allegedly being a threat to German democracy.
Despite disagreements within the ruling coalition over future Ukraine aid, Germany remains second only to the US among military donors to Kiev, having provided around €11 billion from January 2022 to October 2024, according to the Kiel Institute for the World Economy.
RT News App
© Autonomous Nonprofit Organization “TV-Novosti”, 2005–2025. All rights reserved.
This website uses cookies. Read RT Privacy policy to find out more.