Germany’s economy shrank for a second consecutive year in 2024 and is unlikely to grow much in 2025, laying bare the challenge for the country’s new government once snap elections are held in February.
Author of the article:
You can save this article by registering for free here. Or sign-in if you have an account.
(Bloomberg) — Germany’s economy shrank for a second consecutive year in 2024 and is unlikely to grow much in 2025, laying bare the challenge for the country’s new government once snap elections are held in February.
Gross domestic product fell by 0.2% after dropping 0.3% in 2023, the statistics office said Wednesday. It’s only the second time since 1950 that output has contracted for two years in a row.
Subscribe now to read the latest news in your city and across Canada.
Subscribe now to read the latest news in your city and across Canada.
Create an account or sign in to continue with your reading experience.
Create an account or sign in to continue with your reading experience.
The struggles of the continent’s largest economy are an overriding theme of an election that many hope will bring more growth-oriented policies capable of helping drag the 20-nation euro zone out of its own rut.
But few foresee quick fixes to issues that include weak global demand, a manufacturing malaise — particularly among carmakers — the lingering effects of the energy crisis, stifling red tape and a dearth of skilled workers.
“Germany is going through by far the longest phase of stagnation in post-war history,” said Timo Wollmershäuser, who heads forecasting at the Ifo institute. “It is also falling behind considerably in an international comparison.”
Ifo predicts “barely perceptible” growth of 0.4% this year.
Germany was the only Group of Seven economy to shrink in 2023 and is the first to publish full-year numbers for 2024. Its prospects for 2025, however, remain bleak. The Bundesbank predicts growth of just 0.2% and warns that another contraction is even possible if US President-elect Donald Trump follows through on his tariff threats.
What Bloomberg Economics Says…
Get the latest headlines, breaking news and columns.
By signing up you consent to receive the above newsletter from Postmedia Network Inc.
A welcome email is on its way. If you don't see it, please check your junk folder.
The next issue of Top Stories will soon be in your inbox.
We encountered an issue signing you up. Please try again
“Political turmoil at home and the threat of tariffs from the US are likely to weigh on Germany’s economic activity, resulting in only very modest growth. Risks to the outlook are skewed to the downside and major woes in the important manufacturing sector could easily push the country back into recession territory.”
—Martin Ademmer, economist. Click here for full REACT
Economic decline and squabbling over how to arrest it were big factors in the downfall of Germany’s three-party coalition in November. In the early ballot on Feb. 23, Chancellor Olaf Scholz looks set for defeat by Friedrich Merz, who leads the conservative CDU/CSU bloc and is promising fewer regulations and lower taxes.
To get the economy back on track, “we need convincing answers from politicians and companies to the major transformative challenges,” said KfW Research economist Klaus Borger.
How the next government deals with German limits on state borrowing and deficits, known as the debt brake, will be crucial. The stringent rules, long championed by conservative politicians, may be overhauled to allow for more flexibility to fund investments in things like infrastructure, energy and defense.
Germany’s statisticians said fourth-quarter GDP dropped 0.1% from the previous three months — a development that Deutsche Bank economist Robin Winkler described as a worrying surprise.
“If this were to be confirmed, the German economy would have lost momentum again at the beginning of winter,” he said.
The country isn’t alone in Europe in enduring a rough patch. France, the euro area’s No. 2 economy, is grappling with fiscal and political upheaval that will require years of belt-tightening that’s likely to weigh on growth.
A rare bright spot is European Central Bank monetary policy, with officials in Frankfurt set to continue lowering interest rates after cutting them four times in 2024.
—With assistance from Kristian Siedenburg.
(Updates with Bloomberg Economics, Deutsche Bank comment.)
Postmedia is committed to maintaining a lively but civil forum for discussion. Please keep comments relevant and respectful. Comments may take up to an hour to appear on the site. You will receive an email if there is a reply to your comment, an update to a thread you follow or if a user you follow comments. Visit our Community Guidelines for more information.
365 Bloor Street East, Toronto, Ontario, M4W 3L4
© 2025 Financial Post, a division of Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved. Unauthorized distribution, transmission or republication strictly prohibited.
This website uses cookies to personalize your content (including ads), and allows us to analyze our traffic. Read more about cookies here. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
You can manage saved articles in your account.
and save up to 100 articles!
You can manage your saved articles in your account and clicking the X located at the bottom right of the article.