German opposition MP Roderich Kiesewetter has suggested that Berlin will have no choice but to deploy its military to Ukraine in a peacekeeping capacity once a ceasefire has taken hold. The lawmaker from the opposition Christian Democratic Union (CDU) argued that as an economic heavyweight, Germany should take on more responsibility for Europe’s security.
On Friday, the Polish outlet Rzeczpospolita quoted Kiesewetter as saying that Berlin has the obligation to intervene “at the right time with well-equipped troops.” The CDU defense spokesman argued that ruling out such a scenario would be reckless and backed German peacekeepers operating within a joint EU-NATO framework, according to the newspaper.
Meanwhile, last month, German Defense Minister Boris Pistorius made it clear that “Ukraine and Russia have to agree on a mandate they would accept and on the participants of such a mandate.”
The official stated that “if there is a ceasefire, then, of course, the Western community, NATO partners, possibly the United Nations, and the EU will have to discuss how such a peace, such a ceasefire, can be secured,” Pistorius said.
Also in December, however, US state-funded Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, citing anonymous sources, reported that the prospect of such an EU/NATO deployment was slim. The outlet quoted an unnamed EU diplomat as explaining that “first, the Russians will not accept it; second, it will be hard to sell this to the European population.” Another anonymous diplomat confirmed to the media outlet that there was little appetite for such a mission among member states.
Earlier last year, Politico claimed that French President Emmanuel Macron and Polish Prime Minister Donald Tusk could discuss the establishment of a peacekeeping force. However, Tusk later told journalists that Poland had no plans for such action.
Reporting on an EU summit devoted to the Ukraine conflict last month, the Financial Times quoted German Chancellor Olaf Scholz as ruling out any discussion of a troop deployment to Ukraine at this point for fear of further escalating the hostilities.
Russia has repeatedly warned that it would consider Western soldiers in Ukraine to be legitimate targets.
Commenting on such media reports in December, the Kremlin reiterated that it was too early to discuss any peacekeeping missions, as direct peace talks between Moscow and Kiev had yet to begin.
RT News App
© Autonomous Nonprofit Organization “TV-Novosti”, 2005–2025. All rights reserved.
This website uses cookies. Read RT Privacy policy to find out more.