While the rightwing Alternative for Germany (AfD) party has been persecuted and harassed in a myriad of ways by both the MSM and the German establishment, it now has found a home in the social platform X – where the party is getting judged by the quality of their policy proposals, and NOT because Globalist narrative demands it be called ‘far-right.’
This is satisfying for us at TGP, one of the very first news vehicles to report fairly on the German political phenomenon (you can browse our hundreds of articles pieces about AfD here).
After Elon Musk voiced support for the party caused massive waves in the country, things are going to get even more mind-blowing for the liberal Globalists, now that Musk and AfD’s candidate for Chancellor Alice Weidel are to host a ‘Spaces’ podcast together.
Weidel is expected to hold a live online conversation with tech billionaire Elon Musk on January 9.
DPA reported:
“Musk, a close adviser to US President-elect Donald Trump and a major political donor, recently created controversy by wading into German politics with a full-throated endorsement of the AfD in an opinion piece in the Sunday edition of Die Welt newspaper.”
To give an idea of how important that can be, let´s look at the viewership of the YouTube New Year messages for failed Chancellor Olaf Scholz and for Weidel.
Scholz got only 54k views, and was ratioed to death with 3586 dislikes over 1076 likes, while Weidel got over 10 times more – 594k views – with a positive balance of 83k likes and only 1493 dislikes.
Now, compare that with some of the more high-profile X Spaces that have been hosted on X: Musk with Ron de Santis was seen live by over 4,5 million people, while the historic Musk-Trump podcast generated as many as 1 BILLION impressions – according to X’s AI bot Grok, it’s unclear how many of those were actual views.
As we can see, by making a fuss about it, the German political establishment practically guarantees the success of the Musk-Weidel spaces, with the potential of many millions of viewers.
Two days after the podcast, on January 11th, Weidel will be officially nominated as the party’s top candidate, ahead of parliamentary elections on February 23.
“[Musk], who owns electric carmaker Tesla and private space firm SpaceX among other firms, later responded to a pro-AfD influencer: ‘Wait until Alice and I do an X-Spaces conversation. They will lose their minds’ – accompanied by two laughing faces with tears.”
Save the date: On January 9th at 7pm CET, the announced Space with Elon Musk and me will go live on X. We are looking forward to having this exciting conversation and a great audience!
Vormerken: Am 9. Januar ab 19 Uhr findet der angekündigte Space mit Elon Musk und mir auf X… pic.twitter.com/JUm0H9umiv
— Alice Weidel (@Alice_Weidel) January 3, 2025
Read more:
German Globalists Meddled in the US, but Now Accuse Musk of ‘Interfering’ in Upcoming Elections – For Supporting the Same AFD Party That They Have Smeared and Demonized for Years
You can email Paul Serran here, and read more of Paul Serran's articles here.
Sign up now and stay ahead in the political landscape.
Visit GatewayHispanic.com to read news of interest to the hispanic community.
Visit AmericanGulag.org to learn how to help the prisoners of the protest on January 6th.
Visit TGPVideos.com to watch the latest exclusive videos from The Gateway Pundit.
As the mainstream media repeatedly fails and loses public trust, TGP has continued to offer accurate and timely reporting for almost two decades. Visit TGP FactCheck to see how we get it right.
Check out TGP FactCheck to see how terribly wrong the legacy media can get it.
© 2025 The Gateway Pundit
Home
About us
Contact
Privacy
Terms
Get Ad Free