SUBSCRIBE & SAVE
Less than $3 per week
From broadsides against the UK government to boosting Germany's ultra-nationalist AFD party, the world's richest man is making waves across the Atlantic
What does Elon Musk do for work these days? Yes, he's made his fame and fortune at the helm of Silicon Valley juggernauts like Tesla and X, but looking at his recent activity both online and off, it seems the tech titan is much more interested in advancing his right-wing political agenda than in scientific advancements. After successfully throwing his seismic influence behind Donald Trump's 2024 reelection campaign, Musk has joined the incoming administration's DOGE project and positioned himself in the president-elect's innermost circle — with policy implications already starting to become apparent.
Musk has not limited his political interest to the country where he resides. Instead, he has increasingly cast his attention overseas to Europe, offering incendiary analysis on X while boosting a host of far-right figures and causes across the continent, including calling for the release of jailed British ultra-nationalist Tommy Robinson and meeting with right-wing Brexit figure Nigel Farage.
America should liberate the people of Britain from their tyrannical governmentJanuary 6, 2025
In one recent instance, Musk hosted German ultra-right-wing politician Alice Weidel, who used her X-hosted conversation with Musk to ahistorically claim that Adolf Hitler was "a leftist." Weidel, whose hardline Alternative for Germany (AfD) party has been labeled by the country's domestic intelligence agency as a potential far-right extremist group, is a "very reasonable person," Musk said during their conversation. "Nothing outrageous is being proposed." Things are going to get "very, very much worse in Germany" if Weidel's AFD doesn't win in that country's upcoming elections, he said. Is there more to Musk's flirtation with Europe's far-right than meets the eye?
Escape your echo chamber. Get the facts behind the news, plus analysis from multiple perspectives.
From our morning news briefing to a weekly Good News Newsletter, get the best of The Week delivered directly to your inbox.
From our morning news briefing to a weekly Good News Newsletter, get the best of The Week delivered directly to your inbox.
Musk's focus on Europe is likely less a question of financial motivation than "increasing his power and using his influence to change the world," said Columbia University Professor of Technology, Media, and Communications Alexis Wichowski to Bloomberg. He is "building his empire and he is testing how far he can go." The question, said Bloomberg, is "whether he has an endgame beyond provocation, and what that might be." Musk "sees himself as a savior of U.S. democracy from the progressives," said José Ignacio Torreblanca, senior policy fellow at the European Council on Foreign Relations, to The Wall Street Journal. "He thinks this should not stop at home and that it should continue in Europe."
Despite engaging with and boosting "parties with authoritarian leanings, including Germany's AfD" Musk is not actually working toward a "government-centric authoritarianism like fascism," said Elad Nehorai at MSNBC. Instead, he is working toward a world "in which business swallows government and becomes the actual ruling class." And there are more immediate business interests that may have Musk's attention as well. He faces the "possibility of hundreds of millions of dollars in fines" related to his X platform's alleged violations of the European Union's Digital Services Act, which "requires online behemoths to block and remove false content," said The Washington Post's Lee Hockstader.
Musk's renewed focus on European politics also comes as "new registrations for Musk's electronic vehicles fell 13% in the first nine months of 2023" across the continent, The Associated Press said. "In Germany, Tesla registrations dropped 44%." Musk used his conversation with AfD's Weidel to opine about the regulatory hurdles he faced opening a Tesla plant in Germany. "I think it was 25,000 pages was our permit. And it had to be all printed on paper," Musk said. "And then there has to be many, many copies made. So it literally was a truck of paper."
"It is no secret that Tesla was against the government funding for electric charging stations in Germany," said German Chancellor Olaf Scholz, "suggesting Musk's comments stem from business dissatisfaction," said the country's DW broadcaster.
If Musk puts the "same amount of money into all of Europe that he put behind Trump, he will flip every nation to a populist agenda," said MAGA podcaster and longtime Trump ally Steve Bannon to Bloomberg. At the same time, however, some heads of state are "pressing the European Commission to use its legal arsenal against Musk's perceived interference," Reuters said. In Germany, where Musk's comments prompted harsh backlash from elected officials, "several high-profile organizations and users in Germany have already quit X, including the country's highest criminal court," said DW. The German government, however, has "decided against doing so for now."
For Germany's Scholz, meanwhile, there is only one course of action to counter Musk's ongoing political meddling: "Don't feed the troll."
A free daily email with the biggest news stories of the day – and the best features from TheWeek.com
Rafi Schwartz has worked as a politics writer at The Week since 2022, where he covers elections, Congress and the White House. He was previously a contributing writer with Mic focusing largely on politics, a senior writer with Splinter News, a staff writer for Fusion's news lab, and the managing editor of Heeb Magazine, a Jewish life and culture publication. Rafi's work has appeared in Rolling Stone, GOOD and The Forward, among others.
Speed Read
The artificial intelligence research company has launched a new version of its chatbot tailored for the US government
By Rafi Schwartz, The Week US

Published 29 January 25
Speed Read
Robert F. Kennedy Jr.'s cousin said he should not become President Donald Trump's health secretary, calling his medical views 'dangerous'
By Peter Weber, The Week US

Published 29 January 25
Today's Big Question
Rift between US and Colombia, threats of tariffs on Mexico, designs on Panama Canal and mass deportations could encourage closer ties with Beijing
By Harriet Marsden, The Week UK

Published 29 January 25
The Explainer
Nations have often been at odds with each other over geographic titles
By Justin Klawans, The Week US

Published 28 January 25
TODAY'S BIG QUESTION 
The president's plan to deport undocumented workers and levy massive taxes on international imports might have repercussions on your dinner plate
By Rafi Schwartz, The Week US

Published 27 January 25
Today's Big Question
After five days in power, Donald Trump has wasted little time pushing boundaries
By Rafi Schwartz, The Week US

Published 24 January 25
Instant Opinion
Opinion, comment and editorials of the day
By Justin Klawans, The Week US

Published 22 January 25
The Explainer
How the handful of countries on the U.S. terrorism blacklist earned their spots
By David Faris

Published 21 January 25
In the Spotlight
Donald Trump has been inaugurated as the 47th president of the United States
By Justin Klawans, The Week US

Published 20 January 25
Today's Big Question
Incoming US president likes to seem unpredictable but, this time round, world leaders could be wise to his playbook
By Sorcha Bradley, The Week UK

Published 20 January 25
Talking Point
Opening for far-right Freedom Party would be a step towards 'the Putinisation of central Europe'
By The Week UK

Published 19 January 25
Theweek is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site.
©
Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street,
New York,
NY 10036.